[Amit Varma]: Assuming that being alive is a good thing, we are all lucky to have been born in these
[Amit Varma]: times.
[Amit Varma]: As recently as 200 years ago, I'd have expected to be dead before 40, leave alone reach this
[Amit Varma]: ripe old age of 47.
[Amit Varma]: If I got a common cold or an allergy, I could just die of that.
[Amit Varma]: Forget about diseases like cancer because most people didn't live long enough to get
[Amit Varma]: it.
[Amit Varma]: In the 19th century, alternative medicine, which I'd call quackery, thrived because
[Amit Varma]: mainstream medicine was a mess.
[Amit Varma]: The germ theory wasn't yet accepted by the profession and just going to a hospital could
[Amit Varma]: kill you, even if disease didn't.
[Amit Varma]: Even basic hygiene was absent.
[Amit Varma]: One of my heroes, Mary Wollstonecraft, died after giving birth to her daughter, who we
[Amit Varma]: now remember as Mary Shelley, because a doctor hadn't washed his hands.
[Amit Varma]: She got a fatal infection.
[Amit Varma]: Well, times have changed.
[Amit Varma]: The medicine of today would seem like unbelievable magic to the primitives of just a hundred
[Amit Varma]: years ago.
[Amit Varma]: But it's not magic, it's science.
[Amit Varma]: Now here's the thing, we should still not be complacent.
[Amit Varma]: Our scientists might have understood our bodies and created magnificent medicines, but those
[Amit Varma]: medicines still have to reach us.
[Amit Varma]: Someone has to make them.
[Amit Varma]: You can create the finest of medicines in your labs, but how are they actually being
[Amit Varma]: manufactured in our factories?
[Amit Varma]: Is there Jugaar involved?
[Amit Varma]: Are people dying as a result?
[Amit Varma]: The answer, especially if you are in India, is yes.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioural
[Unknown]: science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My guest today is Dinesh Thakur, once a respected scientist in the healthcare industry and now
[Amit Varma]: a crusader on behalf of all of us.
[Amit Varma]: I first read about Dinesh in a brilliant book by Catherine Eban called Bottle of Lies, Ranbaxy
[Amit Varma]: and the Dark Side of Indian Pharma.
[Amit Varma]: Dinesh is one of the heroes of the book, which is about the great fraud committed by the
[Amit Varma]: company Ranbaxy, which no doubt took countless lives across the world.
[Amit Varma]: Now some quick context.
[Amit Varma]: In the pharma world, big companies spend huge amounts of money creating new drugs.
[Amit Varma]: When a new drug created by a company gets approved by regulators, they have the exclusive
[Amit Varma]: right to make it and sell it for a number of years.
[Amit Varma]: This allows them to recoup the expenses of research and development.
[Amit Varma]: Now after this period expires, other companies can also make these medicines and these are
[Amit Varma]: now called generics.
[Amit Varma]: These generics are sold at a much lower cost than the original drug.
[Amit Varma]: And if you want to make something for a low cost, well, India is a good place to start.
[Amit Varma]: The Indian pharma industry's reputation got a big boost about a couple of decades ago
[Amit Varma]: when Cipla, driven by the visionary Yusuf Hameed, made cocktails of AIDS medicine for
[Amit Varma]: a dollar a day, which was a fraction of what it had cost until then.
[Amit Varma]: This was a big deal for the developing world, especially Africa, and probably saved millions
[Amit Varma]: of lives.
[Amit Varma]: The remarkable thing about this was that the reduction in cost did not mean a reduction
[Amit Varma]: in quality.
[Amit Varma]: Cipla's processes were outstanding and they helped get India the reputation of being the
[Amit Varma]: pharmacy of the world.
[Amit Varma]: Now Indian companies rushed in to make generics and one of the early giants was Ranbaxy.
[Amit Varma]: This is the part of the story where Dinesh comes in.
[Amit Varma]: He left a plush job in the USA to come work at Ranbaxy, excited by this new age of Indian
[Amit Varma]: pharma.
[Amit Varma]: But he soon realised that Ranbaxy was a company driven by Jugaad.
[Amit Varma]: While on the job, he found out that they routinely forge data to give to regulators.
[Amit Varma]: Most of their so-called medicines were never even tested.
[Amit Varma]: Dinesh and his team found that over 50% of the data given by Ranbaxy to the FDA, the
[Amit Varma]: main regulator in the USA, was fake.
[Amit Varma]: 100% of the data for India was fake.
[Amit Varma]: All of it.
[Amit Varma]: And ditto for the developing world.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, in an internal meeting, the subject came up that the medicine Ranbaxy sent to
[Amit Varma]: Africa probably did not work.
[Amit Varma]: One Ranbaxy executive replied, quote, who cares, it's just blacks dying, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: When Dinesh realised what was happening, he resigned.
[Amit Varma]: And then he realised that he could not stay silent while millions of people were putting
[Amit Varma]: their faith in medicines that could kill them.
[Amit Varma]: So he complained to the FDA, who began an inquiry into Ranbaxy.
[Amit Varma]: They filed a suit against Ranbaxy and Ranbaxy lost.
[Amit Varma]: They paid out a huge sum as a settlement and admitted that they were guilty of all that
[Amit Varma]: they had been accused of.
[Amit Varma]: But this did not solve anything in India.
[Amit Varma]: The culture of Jugaad continues in the Indian pharma industry to this day.
[Amit Varma]: In his conversation with me, Dinesh describes in chilling detail not only his own experiences
[Amit Varma]: at Ranbaxy, but also the state of Indian pharma since and why he continues to wage a crusade
[Amit Varma]: to reform the system.
[Amit Varma]: Now, I know I've spent a lot of time on this introduction giving this context, but I did
[Amit Varma]: it because this issue more than any other issue I have discussed in the last five years
[Amit Varma]: affects people's lives directly.
[Amit Varma]: It's not hyperbole to say that this is actually a matter of life and death.
[Amit Varma]: So please listen.
[Amit Varma]: But first, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Do you want to read more?
[Amit Varma]: I've put in a lot of work in recent years in building a reading habit.
[Amit Varma]: This means that I read more books, but I also read more long form articles and essays.
[Amit Varma]: There's a world of knowledge available through the internet.
[Amit Varma]: But the problem we all face is, how do we navigate this knowledge?
[Amit Varma]: How do we know what to read?
[Amit Varma]: How do we put the right incentives in place?
[Amit Varma]: Well, I discovered one way.
[Amit Varma]: A couple of friends of mine run this awesome company called CTQ Compounds at ctqcompounds.com,
[Amit Varma]: which aims to help people up-level themselves by reading more.
[Amit Varma]: A few months ago, I signed up for one of their programs called The Daily Reader.
[Amit Varma]: Every day for six months, they sent me a long form article to read.
[Amit Varma]: The subjects covered went from machine learning to mythology to mental models and marmalade.
[Amit Varma]: This helped me build a habit of reading.
[Amit Varma]: At the end of every day, I understood the world a little better than I did before.
[Amit Varma]: So if you want to build your reading habit, head on over to CTQ Compounds and check out
[Amit Varma]: their Daily Reader.
[Amit Varma]: New batches start every month.
[Amit Varma]: They also have a great program called Future Stack, which helps you stay up-to-date with
[Amit Varma]: ideas, skills, and mental models that will help you stay relevant in the future.
[Amit Varma]: Future Stack batches start every Saturday.
[Amit Varma]: Also check out their Social Capital Compound, which helps you master social media.
[Amit Varma]: What's more, you get a discount of a whopping 2500 rupees.
[Amit Varma]: 2500 if you use the discount code UNSEEN.
[Amit Varma]: So head on over to CTQ Compounds at ctqcompounds.com and use the code UNSEEN.
[Amit Varma]: Up-level yourself.
[Amit Varma]: Dinesh, welcome to The Seen and The Unseen.
[Guest]: Thank you, Amit.
[Guest]: This has been a long-term coming.
[Guest]: I mean, we've been corresponding almost for a little over a year now, almost a year and
[Guest]: a half.
[Guest]: And I'm finally glad to be in the same place as you, you know, to record this and talk
[Amit Varma]: about it.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I was very fascinated by the book, The Bottle of Lies by Katharine Iban, in which
[Amit Varma]: you play kind of leading role and also by the larger questions that it raises.
[Amit Varma]: Because you know, one of the interesting things about our existence is that there are so many
[Amit Varma]: things we normalize.
[Amit Varma]: We take it for granted.
[Amit Varma]: We don't think about it.
[Amit Varma]: So we assume, for example, that there is a rule of law, or we assume that the medicine
[Amit Varma]: that we take works, or that the rupee that I earn today will have the same value tomorrow
[Amit Varma]: and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: We kind of survive on these foundations of trust, which at some points you can discover
[Amit Varma]: are a little shakier than one thought.
[Amit Varma]: But before we kind of get to the subject at hand, I want to speak a little bit about you.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me about your early life, because someone who just heard of you in a cursory
[Amit Varma]: way may think of you as a crusader for a particular kind of cause, or a civil activist of sorts.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, it's not just in healthcare, but civil rights also that you've been active, but you're
[Amit Varma]: also someone who is deeply into music, you're a Hindustani classical musician who's been
[Amit Varma]: part of bands.
[Amit Varma]: So give me a sense of the young Dinesh Thakur, where did you grow up, where did you go to
[Guest]: school?
[Guest]: So my family originally is from UP, from Muzaffarnagar, Western UP, you know, they praise us in the
[Guest]: news for all the wrong reasons, but you know, that's where we're from.
[Guest]: But for the last three generations, we've been, you know, sort of living in, you know,
[Guest]: the Hirshwaila, Andhra Pradesh and now Telangana.
[Guest]: My great grandfather was an armyman, you know, in the old Nizam's army.
[Guest]: That's how we migrated there.
[Guest]: And then ever since we've been living, you know, in that area.
[Guest]: I grew up in a little town called Nizamabad, which is about, I think about 170 kilometers
[Guest]: north of Hyderabad, because my grandparents had a place there.
[Guest]: My dad essentially grew up there.
[Guest]: He got a degree in law from the Nizam's college in Hyderabad, then he started practicing law.
[Guest]: So that's where, you know, I grew up, I was born in Hyderabad.
[Guest]: Typical middle class family, you know, went to, I started actually, my education started
[Guest]: with a Hindi medium school, because that was the closest school that was to where we lived.
[Guest]: It was a Marwadi school.
[Guest]: I remember my grandfather sort of walking me to school and bringing me back.
[Guest]: But soon enough, you know, there was a convent school that was a little further down, you
[Guest]: know, the road.
[Guest]: And I think I was in second or third grade that, you know, I'd gotten into the Catholic
[Guest]: school and that's where I graduated from.
[Guest]: And then, you know, 11th and 12th was a local government college, which is a godforsaken
[Guest]: college.
[Guest]: But anyway, went through that.
[Guest]: In those days, the Ismaili state of Hyderabad used to administer what was called the Common
[Guest]: Entrance Examination.
[Guest]: I think it was called EAMCT or something like that, Engineering and Medical Common Entrance
[Guest]: Examination.
[Guest]: So, you know, went through that.
[Guest]: I think I was ranked like 3000 some odd and, you know, by the time my turn came around,
[Guest]: the only thing that was available at that time was chemical engineering.
[Guest]: So I talked to my dad and basically said, look, you know, why can't I do law?
[Guest]: Because he was a lawyer.
[Guest]: And he said, no, no, you're good at math.
[Guest]: You should actually become an engineer.
[Guest]: And that was the only engineering available at that point in time, you know, given where
[Guest]: I was.
[Guest]: So I ended up sort of enrolling into an engineering college at Dosmani University.
[Guest]: It's a really old university in Hyderabad, you know, very reputable.
[Guest]: Now I think it's very different.
[Guest]: But in those days, it still stood for something, trained really good people.
[Guest]: So those were four interesting years, you know, in Dosmani.
[Guest]: Then, you know, graduated and then, you know, it was interesting in those days, you know,
[Guest]: one of the things that we all used to do was everybody who graduated sort of applied to
[Guest]: go to the United States.
[Guest]: That was kind of a given at that point in time.
[Guest]: So, you know, I ended up sort of applying to a bunch of schools there, got accepted
[Guest]: to the University of New Hampshire, they gave me a scholarship and ended up going to Durham
[Guest]: at that point in time.
[Guest]: There's no way that I would have been able to afford it on my own without a scholarship.
[Guest]: But that was just luck, just worked out that way.
[Guest]: And wound up in New Hampshire and then got my master's degree there.
[Guest]: And then that's how my career essentially began.
[Amit Varma]: I'll stay a little bit with the earlier years before you kind of end up there, because what
[Amit Varma]: sort of interests me is, one, you're just three or four years older than me.
[Amit Varma]: So we are almost the same sort of generation in a sense.
[Amit Varma]: I'm curious about growing up at that time, like you mentioned that chemical engineering
[Amit Varma]: was like the one thing left.
[Amit Varma]: So that's where you opt for that.
[Amit Varma]: So number one, what was your conception of yourself like, like, did you think in terms
[Amit Varma]: of I want to do this?
[Amit Varma]: I want to do that?
[Amit Varma]: What were your models?
[Amit Varma]: What were your heroes?
[Amit Varma]: Because I know so many of the influences back in those days used to come from like, cinema,
[Amit Varma]: for example, Bollywood in our case, and, you know, maybe Telugu cinema in your case, I
[Amit Varma]: don't know.
[Amit Varma]: But so many of them came from cinema and also about the values that one takes, like you
[Amit Varma]: have spoken elsewhere about how your grandmother reading the Ramayana and Mahabharata to you
[Amit Varma]: had a deep influence.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm very interested in that, because it seems that in that kind of environment where
[Amit Varma]: you're growing up in the 70s and 80s, there can be two kinds of influences on you when
[Amit Varma]: it comes to values.
[Amit Varma]: And one is what you see happening around you.
[Amit Varma]: And the other is from these kind of things that percolate down, whether it's your grandmother
[Amit Varma]: teaching you Ramayana and Mahabharata or the Amar Chitra Katha and so on.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about that, because these seem very contrary to me.
[Amit Varma]: One of the themes of your experiences in later times also is this sort of culture of, you
[Amit Varma]: know, just doing whatever it takes to make money, just doing whatever it takes to get
[Amit Varma]: ahead and not having a sort of a deeper core there.
[Amit Varma]: So how did these two sort of play out when you were a kid?
[Guest]: So you know, I think, I mean, look, I think that my childhood was no different than, for
[Guest]: example, I'm sure all of our childhood, right?
[Guest]: You know, we all grew up with, you know, a larger family, joint family, where you live
[Guest]: with your parents and grandparents.
[Guest]: And you know, in my case, both my grandparents had a, you know, disproportionately large
[Unknown]: impact on me.
[Guest]: I think my grandfather passed away, you know, 1970s, I was very, very young at that time.
[Guest]: I mean, I have very few memories, but my grandma was still around.
[Guest]: She passed away in the early 90s.
[Guest]: But I have very fond memories of, but and think about like, you know, in large Indian
[Guest]: families, the matriarch, right?
[Guest]: Grandma essentially is the one who essentially runs the house.
[Guest]: I mean, she was a little petite lady, you know, she was like five odd, five feet odd.
[Guest]: But you know, the will of an iron sort of strength, and she was the one who essentially
[Guest]: ran the house.
[Guest]: This is a part of the story, I mean, that I don't think I've ever told anyone before.
[Guest]: So I'm going to have to try and take you back, you know, a couple of hundred years before,
[Guest]: because life kind of, you know, entangles you in very different ways, right?
[Guest]: If you know about the history of the Singh brothers, right?
[Guest]: The family that essentially they come from, their maternal side of their family is very
[Guest]: illustrious.
[Guest]: You know, Baba Charan Singh, who was the head of the Rajaswami Satsang, you know, in base
[Guest]: in Punjab, he essentially comes from a lineage of, you know, I mean, today's, when you think
[Guest]: about gurus, right?
[Guest]: You think about the, you know, the Jaggi Vasudev, Asaram Bapu, to me, those are not the kind
[Guest]: of people that there are.
[Guest]: I mean, there are people who essentially were mystics.
[Guest]: And this gentleman, Charan Singh was one of those people who essentially came from that
[Guest]: line.
[Guest]: Now, for whatever reason, I think that art, that skill is disappearing.
[Guest]: We don't think about those things anymore.
[Guest]: But there was a time when those people were alive, you know, they used to essentially
[Guest]: practice sadhana and they knew what they were doing, right?
[Guest]: So if you trace the lineage of that Sufi tradition all the way to Khusro and to Nizamuddin Auliya
[Guest]: and, you know, the way that that evolved at that point in time, there were two branches
[Guest]: of that.
[Guest]: One was the BS side, which is the Charan Singh side of it.
[Guest]: The other branch was Agra side, which is where, you know, sort of the other branch of the
[Guest]: teaching of Swamiji Maharaj essentially came from that.
[Guest]: The reason I'm saying this is because that lineage percolated down into my family and,
[Guest]: you know, I can't tell you whether it's serendipity or what, that I had to get entangled with
[Guest]: the people who essentially came down from the Charan Singh side.
[Guest]: Because you know, I've, as a child, I've seen, you know, what mystics can do.
[Guest]: They were, I mean, my grandma was one of those.
[Guest]: So it's the tradition of, you know, hearing Ramayana read to you, the tradition of hearing
[Guest]: Mahabharata read to you.
[Guest]: We had copies of Kabir, B.J., like four or five of them in the house, you know, that
[Guest]: we ended up reading.
[Guest]: That's why, you know, the episode that you did of Gita Press with Akshaya Mukul was so
[Guest]: resonating in the way that, you know, that entire sort of tradition about the printed
[Guest]: word evolved over a period of time, you know, so that was environment I grew up in where,
[Guest]: you know, we had this notion of, you know, where you had in a gathering, you know, certain
[Guest]: date or time of the year or whatever, the year where you sat and listen essentially
[Guest]: to Kabir, B.J. being read back to you or Tulsi Ramcharitmanas being read back to you.
[Guest]: And realize that these are written in Dohas, right?
[Guest]: You don't know what that means as a child of five, six, seven years of age.
[Guest]: But then your grandma is explaining to you what that really means, right?
[Guest]: Providing you the context of, you know, what a specific Doha actually really means.
[Guest]: If you read Tulsi Das's Ramcharitmanas, you know, it is such a beautiful poetry.
[Guest]: But then, you know, as a child, you don't know how to comprehend that.
[Guest]: You listen to Kabir, you know, writing about, I mean, this is Nirguni, right?
[Guest]: I mean, completely different kind of thinking in terms of how Kabir imagines the Almighty
[Guest]: to be, right?
[Guest]: And the way he describes the world around him.
[Guest]: It's very hard for a person to reconcile those two things, right, where in one poem, you're
[Guest]: trying to imagine God in the form of a person incarnate.
[Guest]: In the other side, you're essentially saying there's a Nirguni, there's no gun, right?
[Guest]: Kabir talked completely about a Nirguni Bhagwan, right?
[Guest]: I mean, he says, okay, this is where you need to go, this is where you came from, this is
[Guest]: where…
[Guest]: So, those are kind of early influences trying to reconcile those dichotomies in life and
[Guest]: figuring out those have stayed with me for a long period of time.
[Guest]: I don't know if that's good or bad, but, you know, it is what it is.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And in general, when you sort of look at current times and from what you're saying, it then
[Amit Varma]: strikes me that we can, that there's a different kind of corruption at play here, a different
[Amit Varma]: kind of evolution where you have these religious and spiritual traditions, which come down
[Amit Varma]: over a period of time, which have popular resonance, as in Kabir's Ohas and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And yet, over the last few decades, perhaps, this political impetus to take it in a particular
[Amit Varma]: direction, almost as if aping the West in terms of there, the religions are religions
[Amit Varma]: of the book.
[Amit Varma]: There is that one book.
[Amit Varma]: So, a similar thing where you try to homogenize an understanding of what Hinduism is and what
[Amit Varma]: religion is.
[Amit Varma]: And just as I keep saying, we contain multitudes, I mean, the religion contains more multitudes
[Amit Varma]: than anything else, not even a religion, a way of being, as it were, and that's also
[Amit Varma]: gotten corrupted.
[Amit Varma]: And it's very interesting that you speak of that particular tradition, the Swami Satsang
[Amit Varma]: Bohas, which is again, another strand of that is there in the Ranbaxy folks, Malvinder and
[Amit Varma]: Shivinder and the kind of nonsense that is happening there, where it essentially comes
[Amit Varma]: down to being a modern day cult and nothing else, everything else is lost.
[Amit Varma]: So, just looking around at India, is that something that you feel that has also happened,
[Amit Varma]: that in some ways we've let this great religion down by going on and on about how great it
[Guest]: is?
[Guest]: You know, that's a very deep question you're asking and I don't know if I'm qualified enough
[Guest]: to answer that.
[Guest]: But, you know, as somebody who, I don't practice religion, that I don't go to temples anymore
[Guest]: because to me, you know, the experience doesn't mean anything.
[Guest]: I mean, you see pictures of people going to a temple to be showered around because, you
[Guest]: know, you want to spend a few minutes in front of the deity.
[Guest]: I can do that at home.
[Guest]: I don't have to go to a temple to do that.
[Guest]: But I think that, you know, I certainly have an opinion about the politicization of religion,
[Guest]: which I think is just terrible.
[Guest]: I think that, you know, whether it's the new age, you know, aspect of how religion is perceived
[Guest]: or the old age, which is the fundamentalist aspect of how the religion is practiced.
[Guest]: It just turns me away, personally.
[Guest]: I don't know whether, you know, that's something that I can authoritatively speak about it.
[Guest]: But purely from a personal point of view, I think that, you know, the entire purpose
[Guest]: of, you know, religion and tradition was to develop a sense of understanding of your place
[Guest]: in the universe, right?
[Guest]: That seems to have completely gotten lost.
[Guest]: We don't talk about, you know, why we are, you know, and where we are.
[Guest]: We just focus on what is it that we want to do to try and advance a cause.
[Guest]: I don't know what that cause is.
[Guest]: For some people, that cause is to build a temple.
[Guest]: Some people, the cause is essentially to build clean rivers, or I'm not saying that one is
[Guest]: better than the other, but, you know, this existential question of why we are where we
[Guest]: are, I don't know whether we actually even ask that question anymore, right?
[Guest]: So I don't know what to say to the question that you're asking.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, none of us, I mean, I don't know who's qualified to even speak about it these days,
[Amit Varma]: you know.
[Amit Varma]: So it's like, I think everyone's sort of feeling of it is as valid as anything else.
[Amit Varma]: I just remembered that growing up, I would never be at odds with, say, being born a Hindu
[Amit Varma]: in this particular place, but not actually being a practicing Hindu.
[Amit Varma]: You know, being an atheist to school, having the kind of beliefs I do, which some would
[Amit Varma]: say are enlightenment values, but having all of that was fine.
[Amit Varma]: I still fit in here.
[Amit Varma]: This was still my home.
[Amit Varma]: I'm still part of the civilization, and I could be whatever else.
[Amit Varma]: And today, one just feels that the space for that in one sense is not diminishing per se,
[Amit Varma]: perhaps that's a big statement, but that there are people who would like it to diminish,
[Amit Varma]: who would like it to define the civilization in a particular way, and just make everything
[Amit Varma]: so combative, instead of just letting us quietly contain multitudes.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me more about then, you know, what going to New Hampshire was like, like, was a sort
[Amit Varma]: of a culture shock?
[Amit Varma]: What was the study like?
[Amit Varma]: Did you enjoy chemical engineering?
[Guest]: It was, you know, it was certainly a completely new experience for me.
[Guest]: I mean, I'd never been actually, that was my, I think the first flight that I ever actually
[Guest]: took from Bombay, Pan Am used to operate in those days, hadn't gone bankrupt in those
[Guest]: days.
[Guest]: But you know, the way that I learned was very different.
[Guest]: I'll just tell you an interesting anecdote.
[Guest]: So I was thinking about this on my ride coming here, one of the courses that I took in college
[Guest]: while I was enrolled in Osmania, it was a mandatory course for chemical engineers, it
[Guest]: was called the material energy balance, which teaches you the fact, you know, how energy
[Guest]: gets converted from mass to energy, right?
[Guest]: So in that course, and I don't know if this ever happened to you, but in those days, I'm
[Guest]: talking about the 80s and 90s, right, there were no computers, you know, so the question
[Guest]: papers used to be cyclostyle, so the professor used to actually write the question on a piece
[Guest]: of paper.
[Guest]: And then they used to get cyclostyle because Xerox was really expensive, right?
[Guest]: And you used to, I mean, everybody got a piece of the cyclostyle paper, and then the question,
[Guest]: you had to write down the answer to your solution to that question.
[Guest]: Unfortunately, the one that I got was kind of blurry, it wasn't like visible, because
[Guest]: you know, you really have to push down very hard to make that mark on the cyclostyle paper,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: And then it goes to the machine, and then you run around and the Vax generates it.
[Guest]: So when I did my math in that equation, I was off by two digits, because the decimal
[Guest]: wasn't visible to me, right?
[Guest]: So when my paper was evaluated, because my answer didn't actually match what the professor
[Guest]: was expecting, I got a zero on it.
[Guest]: The only reason was because I couldn't read the decimal point in the question that was
[Guest]: defined.
[Guest]: And the reason I say this to you was because when I juxtapose this experience to the way
[Guest]: I was taught, you know, when I went to UNH.
[Guest]: So one of the courses that I had to take there was fluid mechanics, right?
[Guest]: So Professor Carr was my teacher there.
[Guest]: And you know, my term paper was, and in those days, like this is 1991, right?
[Guest]: Stents essentially, you know, the stuff that we put it in arteries, and they were not like,
[Guest]: you know, on board, they were just being developed.
[Guest]: So one of the things that you get taught as a chemical engineer is how do fluids flow?
[Guest]: Because you know, you have to mix things, you have to make sure that you blend slurries
[Guest]: and stuff like that.
[Guest]: And people who are your listeners who have done any kind of chemical engineering will
[Guest]: know that you get taught about venturi flow, laminar flow, turbulent flow, eddies, and
[Guest]: things of that nature.
[Guest]: On one hand, the experience of getting taught in India was that, you know, you used to mug
[Guest]: these things, go out, then vomit it out on a piece of paper, and God forbid, if you didn't
[Guest]: read the cyclostyle paper correctly, you got a zero on it.
[Guest]: Other side of that was Professor Carr, his term paper was, he wanted us to sit down and
[Guest]: think about what angle of a stent would be appropriate.
[Guest]: Because again, you know, there is fluid, there is essentially plasma running through your
[Guest]: arteries and veins, right?
[Guest]: So if you have to put a stent in, you can design a stent to be a Y, right?
[Guest]: So you know, you can have a stent going in with bifurcating, you can design a stent to
[Guest]: be a T, right?
[Guest]: And even if it's a Y, you can have an acute angle, you can have an obtuse angle in there,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: The question he asked was, what angle is most appropriate, you know, in order for the stent
[Guest]: not to have accumulation of plaque?
[Guest]: Remember, our blood actually has platelets in it, right?
[Guest]: Red blood cells and white blood cells, it's not pure liquid, it's a sludge, right?
[Guest]: So the question here is that if you're putting in a stent, you want to design the stent with
[Guest]: a certain angle so that you don't cause plaque formation at the junction.
[Guest]: So the question was, go think about designing, what would the angle be?
[Guest]: Now, asking the question that way, I did not know how to answer because I was never taught
[Guest]: to think in those terms, right?
[Guest]: Here I had to read the McCabe-Smith book, figure out what the equations were, go out
[Guest]: to the term and essentially sort of, you know, solve problems.
[Guest]: The reason I say this is because I think one of the things education does, and I'm hoping
[Guest]: that it is happening here more now, education is not about regurgitating stuff, right?
[Guest]: It's making you think about what is it that you want to do differently.
[Guest]: That question, although I got an A- on it, I don't think I did a great job.
[Guest]: I think that I did the best I possibly could.
[Guest]: But that makes you think, right?
[Guest]: There is no one solution for it.
[Guest]: You can design a T-stent, you can design a Y-stent, you can design, I mean, they were
[Guest]: drug-inducing stents, meaning you coat them with drug and over a period of time they put
[Guest]: drug in the bloodstream.
[Guest]: Open-ended questions are really important, because I don't think there's a solution to
[Guest]: every problem.
[Guest]: If you go in and thinking that I'm going to solve this problem and find a solution today,
[Guest]: you'll be disappointed.
[Guest]: I think that a lot of problems that we find in life, I don't, you know, half the problems
[Guest]: that I deal with don't even have a definition of a problem, forget about a solution, right?
[Guest]: So open-ended solutions, open-ended problems are really important.
[Guest]: And I just hope that our education system is beginning to teach some of these things.
[Guest]: How do you deal with an uncertain world where data isn't available, where, you know, it's
[Guest]: not properly defined?
[Guest]: How do you think about that when you try and solve things of this nature?
[Guest]: Education is really important.
[Guest]: So that, I mean, that's a seminal experience that I think about in terms of when, you know,
[Guest]: when I went to UNH and got my master's there.
[Guest]: That's the kind of experience that I had, which I still remember getting a zero on this.
[Guest]: I was so disappointed.
[Guest]: I was like, I thought I did it right.
[Guest]: And then I found out that my decimal was off by 2.2 digits.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, I did an episode with Anirban Mahapatra, who pointed to an identical experience as
[Amit Varma]: something seminal for him as well, where he mugs up everything here.
[Amit Varma]: And then when he goes out there, he just does really badly in the first exam because he
[Amit Varma]: is not used to thinking like that.
[Amit Varma]: And I have the title of your master's thesis in front of me, soluble and immobilized catalars.
[Amit Varma]: I hope I'm pronouncing that right.
[Amit Varma]: Effect of pressure and inhibition on kinetics and deactivation.
[Amit Varma]: Was it fun?
[Amit Varma]: Was it enjoyable?
[Guest]: It was really fun.
[Guest]: So this is the thing that you were looking at at that time, right?
[Guest]: So again, my advisor, he was from India.
[Guest]: He was from Chennai.
[Guest]: He just retired as the senior provost.
[Guest]: Excellent.
[Guest]: I mean, Dr. Vasu was very, very good.
[Guest]: The only thing I didn't like about him was that he used to hold his classes at 8.30 in
[Guest]: the morning.
[Guest]: I mean, New Hampshire, if you know anything about the geography, snows like crazy in winter.
[Guest]: And so, you know, he insisted on all the students being in the class at 8.30.
[Guest]: We had to get up at 7 o'clock, go to the dorm, eat your breakfast, and then get to class
[Guest]: at 8.30.
[Guest]: It was like minus 40 degrees outside.
[Guest]: But yeah, so what I was doing there, and that was kind of interesting, and this is again
[Guest]: you know, science evolves, right?
[Guest]: In those days, we were doing something completely different in the sense that at that time,
[Guest]: you know, we were thinking about how do you sort of use enzymes as active catalysts to
[Guest]: try and increase the reaction.
[Guest]: And one of the things that you're taught in chemical engineering is that one of the factors
[Guest]: that gives you higher rates of catalysis is surface area.
[Guest]: So the larger the surface area, the better, you know, yield that you get from the reaction.
[Guest]: And so what I was trying to do there was to take, you know, porous beads, like beads with
[Guest]: small pores in it, because the more porous it is, the larger surface area it is.
[Guest]: You take an enzyme, which is a labile thing, enzymes are not very stable, you immobilize
[Guest]: it on that, and then use that in a reaction and see, does the reaction proceed better?
[Guest]: You get a better yield.
[Guest]: The issue there was not whether, you know, what we were doing would actually work.
[Guest]: The issue was, think about, you know, how do you design experiments, how do you design?
[Guest]: So my experimental reaction chamber was a PVC plastic pipe of two inch by two inch long,
[Guest]: with two plastic flanges on both sides.
[Guest]: And I had to build this.
[Guest]: In the lab, I had to build this, I had to cut PVC to take, you know, plexiglass on both
[Guest]: sides, fix it, put flanges in it, essentially to be able to have your input and output on
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: And then, you know, high pressure, right?
[Guest]: So you had to put, you know, high pressure in and see what really happens in that part.
[Guest]: The notion there was that two things.
[Guest]: One is that it taught me how to think about experimental design.
[Guest]: How do you think about, you know, doing an experiment with a hypothesis and testing that
[Guest]: hypothesis and experiment and figuring out whether it works or not?
[Guest]: I mean, nine or 10 times it fails, you still have to go back and try it in a different
[Guest]: way, right?
[Guest]: So that's experimental design point of view.
[Guest]: Second thing it taught me was importance of data, recording what you're measuring in the
[Guest]: lab, right?
[Guest]: Every data point.
[Guest]: So, you know, you just start the reaction, take measurements of one minute, two minutes,
[Guest]: three minutes, five minutes, 10 minutes, and then plot that and see whether the yield
[Guest]: at the end of the reaction time, do you get a better yield or not?
[Guest]: The fidelity of doing that, basic science, right?
[Guest]: I mean, you go to a lab, you have a lab notebook, you think about your experiment, you write
[Guest]: down your hypotheses, think about how you design that experiment.
[Guest]: You say, okay, if my experiment succeeds, this is what I'm going to get.
[Guest]: If my experiment fails, this is what is going to happen.
[Guest]: Happens all the time, right?
[Guest]: But the training that school gives you, any school should give you, is this.
[Guest]: It's not whether, you know, you're producing a Nobel Prize winning invention.
[Guest]: It's about making you think about how do you think about doing science, which today, you
[Guest]: know, I'm sorry to say that we don't think about that anymore, right?
[Guest]: We think about science, again, in black and white terms.
[Guest]: Science is not black and white.
[Guest]: Nine out of ten times things fail, right?
[Guest]: And then you find out one fine morning, you know, after a lot of sweat and blood that,
[Guest]: you know, something actually works.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, the lessons in this go beyond science in terms of the importance of process, importance
[Amit Varma]: of data, the importance of intellectual honesty, even, in just making sure the process and
[Amit Varma]: the data are right.
[Amit Varma]: And even that importance of getting a little meta, thinking about how to think about something
[Amit Varma]: rather than kind of useful skills, which they don't quite teach in India.
[Amit Varma]: And at the same time, while you're in this very cold place, which Indian students famously
[Amit Varma]: sometimes have trouble with, how's the music going?
[Amit Varma]: Because you've been trained in Hindustani classical music, tell me a little bit about
[Amit Varma]: that side.
[Guest]: So again, a lot of this came essentially, remember, you know, the environment at home
[Guest]: was this, you know, traditionalistic.
[Guest]: So if you know anything about the tradition of the mystics, right, there is something
[Guest]: called Shabad, right?
[Guest]: So you sing, you sing, you know, that you recite, you know, the poems of the saints
[Guest]: and basically it's supposed to mean something to you, right?
[Guest]: So I ended up sort of listening at home, you know, singing along with my parents and understanding,
[Guest]: you know, what was really happening.
[Guest]: So it's just that that training, essentially, with a little bit of formal training in Hindustani
[Guest]: classical over a period of time, I'm not any, you know, some great singer or anything like
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: It's just that the environment at home was that we used to sing Shabads, we used to sing,
[Guest]: you know, the traditional Satsang kind of stuff that actually happens at home.
[Guest]: That's how I picked up a lot of this stuff, right?
[Guest]: And then some training, a little bit.
[Guest]: But the good thing in those days, I'll tell you what was good, Spik Mckay was very active
[Guest]: in those days.
[Guest]: There were chapters of Spik Mckay pretty much in every U.S. universities.
[Guest]: I saw, you know, Pandit Bhimsen Joshi, like this close, like I was like right here and,
[Guest]: you know, when he had come to Syracuse at that point in time, I was enrolled in a computer
[Guest]: measuring program.
[Guest]: I mean, what personality, I mean, you are in heaven, you know, when you hear him sing.
[Guest]: I mean, there was just, Spik Mckay was very, very active.
[Guest]: There's chapters of Spik Mckay pretty much in every university.
[Guest]: We used to do concerts, we used to invite, you know, personalities from India to come
[Guest]: in and sing, play, it was a really good time, college days.
[Amit Varma]: And you used to sing in bands also, the rumor goes.
[Guest]: Long time ago.
[Amit Varma]: It's been long.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: At some point, the Pharma lobby is going to get hold of these old recordings and circulate
[Amit Varma]: them.
[Guest]: This is a person.
[Unknown]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: So, after this, you joined Bristol Myers Squibb, where you rise through the ranks very fast.
[Amit Varma]: And also where you, you know, eventually your last post there, I think, is a director of
[Amit Varma]: Discovery Informatics.
[Amit Varma]: But there, what you're doing is beyond chemical engineering in the sense that there's informatics
[Amit Varma]: there, obviously, as your job title goes.
[Amit Varma]: There's also a little bit of robotics, like the way Catherine Iban describes you.
[Amit Varma]: She says, quote, Thakur played a small but cutting edge role in the company's endeavors.
[Amit Varma]: He ran a department that built robots, automated laboratory helpmates intended to make the
[Amit Varma]: work of drug testing more efficient and reliable.
[Amit Varma]: Thakur's lab buzzed with innovation, more than a dozen scientists reported to him.
[Amit Varma]: Pulleys, motors, bells and levers were scattered about, and bright-eyed college students cycled
[Amit Varma]: through pitching in as needed, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And from there, the natural segue would be that I can totally see you kind of continue
[Amit Varma]: down what already was a cutting edge role.
[Amit Varma]: Till today, you are sort of running an AI startup or whatever and doing all of that.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about your role at BMS, what you kind of learned there, and you know,
[Amit Varma]: what made you decide to kind of give that up and move along?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So, you know, so the training that I got as a part of the master's program was two things.
[Guest]: One is think about how to conduct experiments.
[Guest]: The second thing that I got – so there's a subject that is taught in chemical engineering
[Guest]: is called programmable logic controllers and process-oriented design, right?
[Guest]: So you're building, you know – I don't know if you ever passed by one of these big
[Guest]: distilleries or ONGC plants, right, I mean, you can see them, they're big plants that
[Guest]: actually have, you know, pipes going here and there, and they're doing this kind of
[Guest]: stuff.
[Guest]: When you sort of drill it down to basics, it's basically programmable logic controllers,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So all you're saying is there's some switches, right?
[Guest]: So the way that you kind of drive something is you turn the switch on or off so that,
[Guest]: you know, you have a positive or negative, and then you have a pulley that basically
[Guest]: moves things around, right?
[Guest]: So the reason this was important was for twofold, so I have to take a step back and explain
[Guest]: to you what was really happening in those days.
[Guest]: And the reason this is important, because when we talk about India and India being a
[Guest]: pharmacy to the world, right, this is a phrase that is most commonly used right now, or pharmacy
[Guest]: to the developing world, right?
[Guest]: Even as of today, as a country that, you know, sort of has this prowess of, you know, manufacturing
[Guest]: drugs, there's been just one or two instances where we've actually discovered and developed
[Guest]: a drug that has gone to the market.
[Guest]: We've never done that.
[Guest]: The reason is very simple.
[Guest]: We'll come to that later on, why we haven't done that.
[Guest]: But the way that this thing was done back then was that the process of drug development
[Guest]: basically is that, you know, you identify a target in the body, right?
[Guest]: So for example, if you have a receptor of some kind, or if you have a protein that you're
[Guest]: trying to target, right?
[Guest]: You're trying to either make it do more than what it is doing, or you're trying to stop
[Guest]: that from doing something, right?
[Guest]: Those are the kind of things that you're trying to do to try and develop a drug.
[Guest]: Now, the way discovery worked in those days, and it's evolved now a little bit with computer
[Guest]: aided design and artificial intelligence, is that what you used to do was you used to
[Guest]: take scaffolds of chemical structures, right?
[Guest]: And you throw that particular sort of target and see what sticks.
[Guest]: Now, remember, these targets are large protein molecules.
[Guest]: So these are very large molecules, they fold, right?
[Guest]: So this is not like a strict chemical structure.
[Guest]: For example, a simple chemical structure you think about is benzene, right?
[Guest]: Benzene looks like rings, hexagonal rings.
[Guest]: That's how benzene looks like.
[Guest]: If you've got, you know, among your audience, you have people who are chemists, they'll
[Guest]: realize that you can have structures that become really, really complex.
[Guest]: You can have hydrogen molecules, oxygen molecules, right, branching off of that, right?
[Guest]: So you're trying to take a chemical molecule and you're trying to throw that at this target
[Guest]: to either block something or make it do something differently, right?
[Guest]: And the way we used to do that was called high throughput screening, meaning that you
[Guest]: take a thousand of these chemical structures, right, and in an experiment, you see if these
[Guest]: chemical structures bind to the protein at all.
[Guest]: Now, out of the thousand, you may see one or two showing some activity, activity meaning
[Guest]: there is some – it is actually making it do what you want it to do, right?
[Guest]: Then you take that basic structure and then you modify it, right?
[Guest]: You add additional things around it and see if it makes a difference.
[Guest]: Because remember, proteins essentially are like ribbons.
[Guest]: So you take a long ribbon, you fold it, right, and there is this one site in that ribbon
[Guest]: that is the active site.
[Guest]: So you're taking a small chemical molecule and you're trying to attach to that site to
[Guest]: make it do something, right?
[Guest]: So you're essentially now dealing with thousands and thousands of these experiments that you're
[Guest]: doing.
[Guest]: And it's very hard to make, you know, people do that.
[Guest]: Because remember, you know, I mean, if you ask me to do the same thing 10 times, I'll
[Guest]: make a mistake on the ninth time because it's repetitious and it becomes really rote, right?
[Guest]: So the way that we thought about this was, why don't we automate it?
[Guest]: Why don't we essentially build, you know, these systems that actually do these things
[Guest]: at night during the day, you know, and then we can keep an eye on what was really happening.
[Guest]: So my job was essentially to build this.
[Guest]: It was really fancy.
[Guest]: I have a video, but basically, you know, it looked like, you know, if you've seen Ford
[Guest]: Motor Company's manufacturing or even Maruti's company, you have these big robots that look
[Guest]: like robots right now that pick up a piece of the car and put it on a manufacturing line,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: You take a door and you just stick it on.
[Guest]: That's exactly what it looked like.
[Guest]: We had robots, but the smaller ones, you know.
[Guest]: So again, you know, it had pulleys and motors in them, and they used to move things around
[Guest]: from place to place to place.
[Guest]: Now you see a lot more automation.
[Guest]: I mean, the Amazon facility has all robots in it right now.
[Guest]: In those days, that was a novelty.
[Guest]: So my job as an engineer was to build those things for two reasons.
[Guest]: One was because we needed to run thousands of experiments.
[Guest]: It was not like you're doing one or two chemicals, right?
[Guest]: You do thousands and thousands of these, number one.
[Guest]: Number two is that the way that you read out this stuff, like, how do you know that something
[Guest]: actually attaches to the protein and does something?
[Guest]: There are one of two ways that you could do that.
[Guest]: You could take a effervescent, you know, molecule that would light up, right?
[Guest]: So if it attaches to the protein and you take the rest of it out, you would read that because
[Guest]: that would generate light, you know, and the UV light will actually show up.
[Guest]: Or you take a radioisotope, right?
[Guest]: You take, you know, carbon-14 or one of these things, and you take a radioisotope and attach
[Guest]: it to it, and you use a Geiger counter to read it.
[Guest]: Now, you don't want people to be exposed to radiation, right?
[Guest]: I mean, if you were using a radioisotope in your assay, you don't want people essentially
[Guest]: to expose themselves to unnecessary radiation, right?
[Guest]: So that's where robots become really important.
[Guest]: So the job that I was assigned, based on my training, was to build these things.
[Guest]: And this is what we used to do, essentially build, you know, systems that ran day and
[Guest]: night.
[Guest]: They would just pick up.
[Guest]: So think about it like a manufacturing line.
[Guest]: It would know where to go get the compound from.
[Guest]: It would know how to dilute it because you're not going to do the same concentration, right?
[Guest]: So think about if you go to a pathology lab, they take your blood sample, but then they
[Guest]: run the assay.
[Guest]: It's not run the same concentration of that you actually take the blood, they would dilute
[Guest]: it down, spin it, take the white blood cells out, and then they would actually use that
[Guest]: to do a biological assay.
[Guest]: So that's what I was tasked to do.
[Guest]: And we ended up sort of building, you know, those kind of systems, you know, for the company
[Amit Varma]: at that time.
[Amit Varma]: What I also found fascinating reading about your years at BMS was that you've spoken about
[Amit Varma]: this orientation program they put you through.
[Amit Varma]: And there was such a stress of this orientation program on a particular set of values and
[Amit Varma]: how you were supposed to kind of approach your role just in the industry.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a bit about that.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So I mean, this is one of the things that these companies, they used to do, I hope they
[Guest]: still do it, right?
[Guest]: One of the things that they did was when you joined in as a fresh engineer or a fresh scientist,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: You used to get a sabbatical, kind of a rotation, basically.
[Guest]: You would used to go spend a month in every department to try and understand what they
[Guest]: did so that you would at least get a sense of, look, you're not buttonholed into this
[Guest]: one job that you have, but you get a bigger picture.
[Guest]: But the biggest thing that was drilled into you, into all the people who they hired was,
[Guest]: why are you doing this, right?
[Guest]: It's not about trying to punch a machine or a tablet, get the tablet out.
[Guest]: It's not about designing a robot.
[Guest]: At the end of that line, there's a patient.
[Guest]: And you're doing this essentially to try and make a difference in the patient's life.
[Guest]: That was the biggest thing that I think was really important, because what happens is
[Guest]: that when you graduate from college, right, you don't have that perspective.
[Guest]: You're going in as a computer engineer to design software.
[Guest]: You're going in as a mechanical engineer to be able to design some machines and systems.
[Guest]: You're going in as a chemical engineer to design chemical reactions and figuring out
[Guest]: how to make, you know.
[Guest]: What you don't see is that how all of this comes together in the end, and it impacts
[Guest]: somebody's life, right?
[Guest]: So bringing in people to be able to correlate to that, right, where you get to interact
[Guest]: with the patient who says, look, I'm taking this drug, and I've been diagnosed with a
[Guest]: melanoma, and I'm on your drug, and it's making my life better, that's a really powerful message
[Guest]: that goes to somebody to say, you're making a difference in somebody's life.
[Guest]: I just don't know whether we do it often enough these days, right?
[Guest]: We're so focused on the bottom line that I don't know whether we do it in a way to try
[Guest]: and put context into young people that, yes, you're doing a job.
[Guest]: I understand that.
[Guest]: You're earning a living.
[Guest]: You're really trying to make a difference.
[Guest]: But there's a bigger picture out there.
[Guest]: You really are trying to make a difference in somebody's life.
[Guest]: That I think is really important, and BMS did that very, very well, you know, for people
[Guest]: like me who joined the ground level, you know, and worked our way up, so.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that kind of training also plays one part in explaining sort of this deeper cultural
[Amit Varma]: difference that seems to be there between, say, US pharma and Indian pharma.
[Amit Varma]: And just the syncing of the end user, you know, applies to a lot else.
[Amit Varma]: Like I think, like even in writing, like, you know, the very first lesson of my course
[Amit Varma]: essentially is that when we write too often, we think of writing as an act between us and
[Amit Varma]: our laptop, my or Mary laptop, that I have thoughts in my head, I put them down on paper
[Amit Varma]: or on the laptop, and it's done and you're not thinking of the reader.
[Amit Varma]: Because your writing only becomes meaningful when it has an intended effect on the intended
[Amit Varma]: reader.
[Amit Varma]: And we don't often enough think of that.
[Amit Varma]: And I think that this can then be extrapolated as a danger to any calling or any profession
[Amit Varma]: or vocation that you forget that end purpose, that you kind of get lost in the mechanics
[Amit Varma]: of whatever it is that you're doing at any point in time, and you kind of let that go.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about then how, you know, you rise up rapidly, as millennium begins,
[Amit Varma]: you are the director of informatics at this very well regarded company in the US.
[Amit Varma]: And then you decide to come back.
[Amit Varma]: So take me take me through that process.
[Guest]: Basically, you know, it was again, serendipity, right?
[Guest]: So, you know, an opportunity presented itself.
[Guest]: So I was a, you know, I was working in informatics, and there's this gentleman who was a fairly
[Guest]: senior person, his name was Rashmi Waria.
[Guest]: He was responsible for pharmaceutics.
[Guest]: Now, what that means is basically, how do you design a drug so that your body can absorb
[Guest]: it, right?
[Guest]: So think about it, we talked about how, you know, to find this one drug that works against
[Guest]: a target, right?
[Guest]: Let's assume that you find that, right, you find something that is novel, that, you know,
[Guest]: works against a particular disease.
[Guest]: That's not the end of the story, because you know, how do you actually get it to a patient
[Guest]: that patient will take it, right?
[Guest]: You have to figure out, look, if I, you know, you know, if I formulate that as a capsule,
[Guest]: you know, will the patient take it?
[Guest]: If I make it a suspension, like a liquid formulation, will the patient take it?
[Guest]: Does it have to be an injectable, meaning that, you know, it has to be available immediately.
[Guest]: Remember, if you eat something, it takes time for the chemical or the biological thing to
[Guest]: go into your stomach, get absorbed, and then become bioavailable, right?
[Guest]: If you want something immediately, like, for example, if somebody is suffering with a stroke,
[Guest]: you can't give them a tablet.
[Guest]: You want to inject a clot-busting drug right away, so the clot essentially sort of, you
[Guest]: know, vanishes, you know, at that point in time.
[Guest]: So these things, how do you make the drug available, is the remit of what is called
[Guest]: pharmaceutics.
[Guest]: And he was the head of that group at that point.
[Guest]: He had accepted a role to join Ranbaxy as the head of their research and development.
[Guest]: I did not know this.
[Guest]: So one day, you know, the campus where I used to work, you know, there was a time where,
[Guest]: you know, we used to walk around in the afternoon, after lunch, just kind of clear our head,
[Guest]: talk with people.
[Guest]: It was just a cultural thing there.
[Guest]: So one day he asked me whether, you know, we would do that.
[Guest]: And while we were walking around, you know, he told me that, look, you know, I'm leaving
[Guest]: EMS, and he was there for a long time, much longer than I was there.
[Guest]: And he said, I'm going to go to India, I'm going to be heading this company, and I didn't
[Guest]: know what the company was.
[Guest]: And he told me, look, you know, you've risen really, really fast in this organization,
[Guest]: but you're going to hit a glass ceiling here.
[Guest]: You know, there's only so many vice presidents and directors in the company, right?
[Guest]: This is an opportunity for you to go back and do something very different.
[Guest]: You know, the skills you have, I really need that skills along with me in my new role there.
[Guest]: It's a good way for you to give back to the country as well, because this is not something
[Guest]: that the country has.
[Guest]: I'm going to try and do something very different, you know, in this case.
[Guest]: And the company has told me that I had a free hand in doing what I need to do.
[Guest]: And why don't you come with me, right?
[Guest]: So that came out of the blue for me, because I had no idea that I would even be considering
[Guest]: something like that.
[Guest]: But having thought about it, and, you know, I did my own research, but there was one time
[Guest]: that I'd come to visit my parents.
[Guest]: I went and met, you know, people in New Delhi.
[Guest]: In fact, the interesting Brar, who was the CEO of Ranbaxy at that time, he had come to
[Guest]: New York once.
[Guest]: He was at the Hilton, you know, in the Grand Central, and he'd asked me to come meet with
[Guest]: him.
[Guest]: So I'd went and met with him there.
[Guest]: So over a period of time, this courtship happened, and, you know, comfort developed.
[Guest]: And you know, given the fact that this was a very unique opportunity, I decided that
[Guest]: I would come here, and helping Rashmi build what he wanted to build.
[Guest]: He really wanted to turn Ranbaxy from a manufacturer of drugs to a company that actually researched
[Guest]: and developed drugs.
[Guest]: That was his vision in terms of what he wanted to do.
[Guest]: That's the reason why he accepted this position to come here.
[Guest]: And you know, he said, look, you know, I need people like you, because, you know, it's going
[Guest]: to be a, it's a big job, and I need people like.
[Guest]: So he had another gentleman, his name is Qasim Mukhtiar, who was also a fairly senior person.
[Guest]: He came along with him.
[Guest]: I came along with him, Nimish came along with him.
[Guest]: So it was a bunch of people essentially sort of, you know, came along, because we really
[Guest]: saw an opportunity to try and make a difference and rebuild this kind of raw prowess that
[Guest]: we saw within the Indian pharma.
[Guest]: Because you know, Indian pharma was doing really, really well in those days, you know.
[Guest]: From a price competition point of view, in the US, obviously, healthcare costs are really,
[Guest]: really expensive, right?
[Guest]: So the Indian companies were making, you know, huge sort of, you know, dent into that market.
[Guest]: And it was a very unique opportunity to say, can you steer the ship from just making stuff
[Guest]: to doing something innovative?
[Guest]: Could we do all of something new that the country's never done before, right?
[Guest]: That was a great attraction for somebody like me to come here.
[Amit Varma]: So to contextualize that, I want to sort of examine a couple of parallel tracks that are
[Amit Varma]: sort of also developing during this time, and one, of course, is the whole funda of,
[Amit Varma]: you know, innovator companies, which will develop a medicine, say they'll have a patent
[Amit Varma]: on it that will last for, I think, 17 years.
[Amit Varma]: And during that time, they charge whatever, they make their money back, and they make
[Amit Varma]: their profits.
[Amit Varma]: And after that, you have generics coming in, where pretty much anybody who demonstrates
[Amit Varma]: that they can make it with a different process, can just get in there.
[Amit Varma]: And that's a middle thing.
[Amit Varma]: And for a lot of Indian companies, then they became good at sort of reverse engineering,
[Amit Varma]: that how is this made, figuring out a slight difference in the process and getting into
[Amit Varma]: that generics market where you're making cheap medicines and making your money that way.
[Amit Varma]: And part of what you guys went there to do, as you said, Rashmi and you and all the others,
[Amit Varma]: was take it up the value chain, where you're kind of innovating and developing your own
[Amit Varma]: medicines.
[Amit Varma]: The other sort of interesting parallel track I find here is what Yusuf Ameed did with a
[Amit Varma]: Zipla when they made the AIDS cocktail for Africa at less than $1 a day.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about that and also the significant, what was really happening
[Amit Varma]: in that generics market which perverted those incentives?
[Guest]: So I think that's a story that needs to be told and told again.
[Guest]: Because I don't think that we, as Indians, really understand what Mr. Ameed actually
[Guest]: did.
[Guest]: I think that it's a really powerful story to think about, because the drugs that were
[Guest]: developed to combat the AIDS epidemic, characteristically, this is what pharma does, they essentially
[Guest]: try and extract blood from a stone if they have a product.
[Guest]: Even today, look at hepatitis C, the drug that is available to treat hepatitis C that
[Guest]: Gilead makes, it's sold at $1,000 per pill.
[Guest]: Now the argument that they make is it's essentially a quality of life, it's the value of what
[Guest]: we are adding to somebody's life who's suffering with a really bad infection, whether it's
[Guest]: hepatitis C or HIV.
[Guest]: But let me just digress a little bit here for a second.
[Guest]: This is really interesting, because given your background and your interest in economics,
[Guest]: so there are two pricing models.
[Guest]: One pricing model that basically says, what value do I add to my consumer?
[Guest]: I charge that based on the value that I add.
[Guest]: This is what most pharma companies do.
[Guest]: They say that if I can keep you out of the hospital for X number of days, and hospitalization
[Guest]: costs X number of dollars per day, that is the value that I'm adding to you.
[Guest]: By taking this pill, you don't have to go to the hospital.
[Guest]: That's how you extrapolate and say, okay, my drug has to cost $30,000 a year.
[Guest]: It's unreal.
[Guest]: It's stupid.
[Guest]: The other way we think about when it comes to genetics is this cost-plus model.
[Guest]: What does it take you to make something, and there's a decent margin on top of that.
[Guest]: That's a cost-plus model.
[Guest]: This is really interesting.
[Guest]: Think about this.
[Guest]: When Pfizer developed vaccines, the mRNA vaccines right now, and Pfizer said, okay, you know
[Guest]: what, they were the first ones who got regulatory approval, emergency approval for a vaccine.
[Guest]: How do you determine the value, the price of that particular vaccine?
[Guest]: The entire world is shut down.
[Guest]: This is essentially, you have a product that has the ability to return the economy back
[Guest]: to normal.
[Guest]: Now, they charge the US, the Center for Medicare Services, I think paid between $26 and $30
[Guest]: per shot for Pfizer.
[Guest]: How they arrived at it, I don't know.
[Guest]: But you can take that argument to a ridiculous nature saying, look, because I'm going to
[Guest]: now enable the world's economy to come back, I can charge $1,000 for it, right, if you
[Guest]: follow the value-based model.
[Guest]: You can't do that anymore.
[Guest]: Nobody will be able to afford something like that.
[Guest]: This notion about companies charging a lot of money, we will come back and revisit that
[Guest]: a little bit.
[Guest]: But what happened with Mr. Hamid and Dr. Hamid and Zipla was basically they broke that model
[Guest]: because there were companies in the United States who were charging an anomaly leg for
[Guest]: this therapy for very, very poor people.
[Guest]: They didn't care whether this disease was endemic in Africa.
[Guest]: They were still asking Africans to pay the same price that the United States would pay.
[Guest]: There's no way that model works, right?
[Guest]: And so there were a couple of different people in the US activists who worked with Dr. Hamid
[Guest]: and they basically broke that model and basically said, look, we are going to reverse engineer
[Guest]: this thing.
[Guest]: We are going to essentially give you a dollar a day cocktail while they were charging $300.
[Guest]: And that essentially revolutionized people's lives.
[Guest]: What happened in Thailand?
[Guest]: What happened here in Bombay?
[Guest]: What happened in Africa?
[Guest]: People all gave their life to what Dr. Hamid did.
[Guest]: He basically broke that model of, you know, the pharma companies holding poor patients
[Guest]: hostage for the kind of money that they were looking for.
[Guest]: And the reason that happened was because two things, right?
[Guest]: One was in the 70s, our Prime Minister Indira Gandhi was basically provided this pathway
[Guest]: where she said, look, if you can figure out a different way of making the same product,
[Guest]: you have protection.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: So this is how we developed reverse engineering skills in the country.
[Guest]: We began to sort of figure out how to make the same product but a different way, right?
[Guest]: That's how our genetic industry evolved.
[Guest]: So we had those skills.
[Guest]: So when the activists in the US, Bill Haddad, they came and talked to Dr. Hamid, they figured
[Guest]: out that this is what they would do and they broke that model.
[Guest]: So that was what was happening at that particular time.
[Guest]: That was one.
[Guest]: The second thing that was really happening at that time was this concept called a patent
[Guest]: cliff.
[Guest]: So as you said, once you register a patent over a period of time where you have exclusivity,
[Guest]: essentially after that, multiple companies come in and the price drops.
[Guest]: What was unique in that time period, the late 90s and early 2000s, right?
[Guest]: The number of blockbuster drugs that went off patent, I've never seen that many drugs
[Guest]: actually go off patent any time after that.
[Guest]: That was a period of seven to eight years where drugs like Lipitor, right?
[Guest]: Drugs like, you know, all the statin drugs, which is essentially billion dollar drugs
[Guest]: at that point in time, they were all going off patent.
[Guest]: So it was a great opportunity for the Indian pharma industry, which had this promise to
[Guest]: be able to think about how to remake this particular sort of chemicals in a different
[Guest]: way.
[Guest]: There was a once in a lifetime opportunity for them to be able to do that.
[Guest]: So those two things came together, became sort of a harmonization of those two things,
[Guest]: which essentially provided a Philip to the industry to sort of dream big and say, look,
[Guest]: we can reverse engineer and manufacture, but even these guys realized, look, this is not
[Guest]: going to last forever, right?
[Guest]: Once the patent cliff vanishes, you're going to be back to essentially doing the same thing
[Guest]: over again.
[Guest]: So we have to invest in doing something different.
[Guest]: We have to innovate.
[Guest]: We have to be able to, you know, get our own products, because you see, if you have an
[Guest]: innovative product, you command a premium.
[Guest]: You can charge a lot more money doing that.
[Guest]: So that was the context at that point.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and it's also fascinating to me how, you know, it's easy to sort of paint everyone
[Amit Varma]: with the same brush and say, oh, this is a culture in India, you know, the kind of thing
[Amit Varma]: that Ranbaxy did.
[Amit Varma]: But if you kind of look at Yusuf Amir and CIPLA and the kind of values that they believed
[Amit Varma]: in, the importance in processes and quality and all of that, it's just off the charts.
[Amit Varma]: And at the same time, you have some of the newer companies like Ranbaxy, where everything
[Amit Varma]: was bottom line, where you went in and there were, you know, you had posters in the walls
[Amit Varma]: pushing you towards getting a higher profit percentage of, you know, reaching, say, 1
[Amit Varma]: billion in the US when they were 100 million at the time, I think, or reaching a total
[Amit Varma]: of 5 billion, whatever, sort of 1 billion at the time.
[Amit Varma]: And another sort of interesting nuance to the way that companies were allowed to make
[Amit Varma]: generics was that, you know, when you applied for the permission to make a generic medicine,
[Amit Varma]: there was an added incentive for whoever was the first to get approved, because that company
[Amit Varma]: would get six months of a clear run to be able to make the generic when they could make
[Amit Varma]: a lot of money.
[Amit Varma]: And then after six months, everybody else kind of comes in.
[Amit Varma]: And Iban's book describes, like, it's like, you know, wars in the streets where you have
[Amit Varma]: the parking lots of the FDA, and people from different generic companies are camping out
[Amit Varma]: there and different groups, because when the door opens in the morning, they want to be
[Amit Varma]: first with their application, and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And this also meant cutting corners.
[Amit Varma]: Because you have this era of the patent cliff, you have a limited number of drugs which are
[Amit Varma]: going off patent, and you got to be first and whether you're ready with the science
[Amit Varma]: or not.
[Guest]: Yeah, so this was an unfortunate outcome of this US law, right, the Vatch Haxman Act,
[Guest]: that created this nonsense.
[Guest]: This was a compromise that was reached with the big pharma, right?
[Guest]: Remember, initially, when the generics came around, big pharma basically tried to malign
[Guest]: them and saying, okay, these are not good quality drugs, they don't know what you're
[Guest]: doing.
[Guest]: And obviously, you know, activists pushed and pushed and pushed, right?
[Guest]: So the compromise was that, look, they'll try and get another little bit out of it.
[Guest]: And the six months was essentially to say, we are going to license our technology to
[Guest]: some other company that will give us six more months to try and milk this market as much
[Guest]: as we possibly can.
[Guest]: That was the genesis of the six-month exclusivity.
[Guest]: But you never have a full appreciation of the incentives at the time that you give incentives,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: How they play out in the market is something that you get a sense of it later on.
[Guest]: And this was an incentive that was well-intentioned.
[Guest]: Unfortunately, it was completely sort of, you know, taken upside down.
[Guest]: And it became, you know, a reason for companies to cut corners and then try and figure out
[Guest]: what they need to do.
[Amit Varma]: So let's talk about your time at Rinbux, you know, so you kind of get out there.
[Guest]: And Rashmi doesn't last very long.
[Guest]: No, so he doesn't.
[Guest]: I think what happened was that he had developed a difference of opinion with the family.
[Guest]: So there's a power struggle happening in those days, because, you know, see, DS Broward,
[Guest]: who was the chairperson and the CEO of the company, right?
[Guest]: So there were the family waiting in the wings, right?
[Guest]: And it was as if he was warming the chair for the, you know, CEO of the family to take
[Guest]: over.
[Guest]: And obviously, there was power politics going on in there.
[Guest]: And then between all of that, you know, Rashmi's equation with the company kind of deteriorated
[Guest]: a little bit, and he decided to leave and start his own.
[Guest]: So I think after me, within a year of me joining, a little over a year of me joining, he decided
[Amit Varma]: to leave.
[Amit Varma]: At one point, you know, he apparently said to you, you'll never believe the kind of shenanigans
[Amit Varma]: that are going on.
[Amit Varma]: But he didn't elaborate.
[Amit Varma]: And at that point, did you have a sense that something is dodgy here?
[Guest]: Something is not right?
[Guest]: Yeah, so I never thought that there was an issue with the quality of stuff that was going
[Guest]: on.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, scuttlebutt was that Rashmi wasn't getting along, wasn't getting along
[Guest]: with the family, with Malvinder, and in the meetings, we could see, right, body language,
[Guest]: you could see in a meeting sitting across the table, because Malvinder was at that point
[Guest]: in time, head of India business.
[Guest]: So he was running the India business at that point in time.
[Guest]: So I would see him in meetings, and you could see the body language.
[Guest]: They're not like, you know, not like colleagues and colloquial kind of stuff.
[Guest]: So my suspicion was that there's something going on personally between them, not so much
[Amit Varma]: in terms of the product that they were making.
[Amit Varma]: One interesting side note that I kind of realized from Iban's book was that when Rashmi left,
[Amit Varma]: he actually got, you know, a big settlement when he left, which can also be interpreted.
[Amit Varma]: And I think, you know, Iban implies that it was sort of just a silent about whatever you
[Amit Varma]: might have seen.
[Guest]: I, you know, unfortunately, I've never gotten a straight answer what that was for.
[Guest]: All I know is that, you know, yes, there was a big settlement.
[Guest]: You can read it to say, well, you know, just go away and keep your mouth shut.
[Guest]: Or, you know, this was something that was negotiated right off.
[Guest]: I just don't know.
[Guest]: I mean, I didn't get anything, you know, I was just I walked away with whatever was due
[Guest]: to me.
[Amit Varma]: That was it.
[Amit Varma]: So, yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And ditto Rajendra Kumar.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: When you talk about, you know, unsung heroes, right, Dr. Hameed, Dr. Kumar is another one
[Guest]: of those.
[Guest]: I mean, it's very few people that you run into who really have the courage of their
[Guest]: conviction to say, look, I am who I am.
[Guest]: I'm not going to be a part of the shenanigans.
[Guest]: I mean, the guy was a head of, you know, the CNS clinical research at GSK.
[Guest]: Like, I mean, he was among the four top four or five people in GlaxoSmithKline R&D.
[Guest]: Gives up that position, comes to India.
[Guest]: On principle, he says, I'm a medical doctor.
[Guest]: I know what is happening here.
[Guest]: I'm not going to be a part of it.
[Guest]: You want me to fix it?
[Guest]: I know how to fix it.
[Guest]: Give me the resources to try and put these things right.
[Guest]: And if you don't, I'm going to walk away from it.
[Amit Varma]: He walked away.
[Amit Varma]: Let's zoom into the story and stretch it out a bit.
[Amit Varma]: He's your new boss.
[Amit Varma]: You instantly take a liking to him and, you know, medical doctor, great values, obviously
[Amit Varma]: incredibly competent at his work.
[Amit Varma]: He goes to South Africa and he comes back and he's shaken, you know, take the story
[Amit Varma]: forward from there.
[Guest]: See, this is what had happened, right?
[Guest]: So there was a French inspector named Olivier Lableyre, right?
[Guest]: He's still there.
[Guest]: He's still working for the French regulatory agency.
[Guest]: Good friend of mine, good friend.
[Guest]: He was a part of a WHO group, right?
[Guest]: Now let me explain a little bit about how it works.
[Guest]: So what happens is the WHO is a World Health Body, right?
[Guest]: Not every country has their own regulatory structure, right, to evaluate the quality
[Guest]: of medicines, right?
[Guest]: There's a lot of countries in Africa that they don't have that capability.
[Guest]: Nigeria does today, right?
[Guest]: They have done a really good job.
[Guest]: Tanzania does, Congo does.
[Guest]: But there are several different countries that don't have the capability, right?
[Guest]: What they do is they rely on the World Health Body to say, do you think that we can buy
[Guest]: these medicines, right?
[Guest]: So the way the WHO thinks about this is they develop, you know, a framework to say these
[Guest]: are pre-qualified manufacturers.
[Guest]: So we have done our due diligence on them.
[Guest]: We believe that they know what they're doing.
[Guest]: We can vouch for the quality of what they are producing, right?
[Guest]: And they put that list out.
[Guest]: And these countries that don't have the regulatory capacity then look at that list and say, okay,
[Guest]: we know what WHO has said this.
[Guest]: We can trust their assessment, so we'll go ahead and buy it from this particular manufacturer.
[Guest]: That is how the process is supposed to work.
[Guest]: Now as a part of that assessment, the WHO relies on doing inspections, right?
[Guest]: They go out there and obviously check before they can approve some manufacturer out there.
[Guest]: WHO doesn't have regulatory capacity, right?
[Guest]: So it pulls in from countries' regulatory capacities, wherever countries have good regulatory
[Guest]: capacity.
[Guest]: They'll say, can you lend us your inspectors, right?
[Guest]: We'll come in and do this.
[Guest]: So the gentleman who was leading that effort at the World Health Organization was a gentleman
[Guest]: named Andre Wanziel.
[Guest]: He was a medical doctor, and he pulled in regulators from different countries.
[Guest]: And this was a German-French regulator, Olivier.
[Guest]: He came in to basically inspect Ranbaxy's portfolio.
[Guest]: Because remember, at that time, what was happening was Bush was elected.
[Guest]: AIDS was rampaging through the world at that time.
[Guest]: In public pressure, they established the president's emergency relief for Africa and Southeast
[Guest]: Asia.
[Guest]: Part of that thing was that the Clinton Foundation, they basically said, look, we are going to
[Guest]: work with these companies in India who certainly know how to make these drugs.
[Guest]: We will negotiate a really good price for you because we'll combine all the volumes
[Guest]: from across the African countries.
[Guest]: We will combine the volumes, we will negotiate a really good deal, and we will help you get
[Guest]: you really good quality AIDS drugs that are manufactured in India.
[Guest]: As a part of that process, the WHO was evaluating Ranbaxy's portfolio of lamivudine, stavidine,
[Guest]: ziduvidine.
[Guest]: These are the antiretroviral drugs that are essentially used to treat HIV.
[Guest]: So they stop replication of the virus.
[Guest]: The way things work is that pharma companies, what they do is that they usually work with
[Guest]: outside contracting companies who run clinical units.
[Guest]: So Ranbaxy had its own clinical unit as well.
[Guest]: In Delhi, there's a hospital called the Majidia Hospital.
[Guest]: This is where Ranbaxy did their internal work.
[Guest]: But usually the number of molecules you're developing is much larger than the capacity
[Guest]: of your internal unit actually can do, so you outsource it.
[Guest]: So they've given it to this company called Vimta Laboratories in Hyderabad.
[Guest]: So Olivier goes there, he does the inspection, and he finds out that these guys are fudging
[Guest]: data.
[Guest]: So they're saying essentially that we've enrolled 20 patients, he can only find one ECG.
[Guest]: And he says, this is nonsense.
[Guest]: So he goes back, makes a report, and that report goes to the South African regulator.
[Guest]: Because remember, South Africa is going to buy, they're going to look at these reports,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: How are they going to buy?
[Guest]: Because WHO puts out this report, the buying agency is going to look at that report and
[Guest]: say, they call up Ranbaxy and say, what the heck is happening here?
[Guest]: You guys are outsourcing your work to third-party company and they're fudging data, right?
[Guest]: So Brian, who was CEO at that point in time, and Raj was like, I think, maybe not even
[Guest]: a month, maybe three weeks into his job.
[Guest]: He calls Raj and says, look, I need you to go to South Africa.
[Guest]: I need you to go to Johannesburg and sit down and tell them that we'll fix it.
[Guest]: Whatever the problem is, we'll make sure that all of these things will be straightened out.
[Guest]: And the reason he did that, because he was counting on Raj's essentially standing as
[Guest]: a doctor, right?
[Guest]: Brian would never be able to make that kind of a case.
[Guest]: You're getting a qualified medical doctor with that kind of standing to vouch for the
[Guest]: company.
[Guest]: So Raj goes there to Johannesburg, along with another gentleman who is responsible for outsourcing.
[Guest]: So this guy's job was to get the work done from all of these other contract companies.
[Guest]: He has his meeting, he tells them, look, don't worry about it.
[Guest]: You know me, I can fix these things, don't worry about it.
[Guest]: On the way back, he's told on the flight that, you know, you're new here.
[Guest]: You don't know the whole story, but this is not a unique situation that you're dealing
[Guest]: with.
[Guest]: You'll have to deal with this.
[Guest]: You know, other instances.
[Guest]: He's like, what the heck are you talking about, right?
[Guest]: I thought this was like a one-off thing that, you know, something happened with the bad
[Guest]: contractor.
[Guest]: We're trying to fix this thing.
[Guest]: Now, you're telling me that there's more to it?
[Guest]: He says, what?
[Guest]: Tell me more.
[Guest]: And he said, I don't know.
[Guest]: You'd have to figure it out.
[Guest]: He wasn't kind of in a non-committal at that point.
[Guest]: I won't give him the real story.
[Guest]: So when he got back, he called me, and my job was portfolio management at the point.
[Guest]: So he called me back and basically said, look, I really need to know to get to the bottom
[Guest]: of this, because I'm being told, when Brian told me it was a one-off thing, he said, just
[Guest]: go and talk to them and make sure that things will be sorted out.
[Guest]: Now I'm being told that this is not unique to just South Africa, there's a bigger issue
[Guest]: here.
[Guest]: I really need to know what that is, and that is how this entire thing got started.
[Amit Varma]: Take me through the next step, because at this stage, the assumption is that, OK, something
[Amit Varma]: went wrong with the contractor and whatever, and there might be other issues, but they're
[Amit Varma]: minor issues.
[Amit Varma]: They are kind of fixable.
[Amit Varma]: There is no sense that there is a problem with the edifice itself, that everything is
[Amit Varma]: shaken, that most of the data might just not be falsified, that it's all just a kind of
[Amit Varma]: a pack of cards.
[Amit Varma]: So what he asks you and your team to do is, therefore, to look at every different market,
[Amit Varma]: what medicines are going there, what is the data, and go back to the source of the data
[Amit Varma]: and see that it matches.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me about how you now approach this problem, like you're sitting with your team,
[Amit Varma]: what's going on there?
[Amit Varma]: What are you telling them?
[Amit Varma]: How big is the problem for you, just in terms of getting to the next stage of this investigation?
[Guest]: So thankfully, at that point in time, I'd only hired a group of five people.
[Guest]: And they were responsible for each of these portfolios, so the company's portfolio was
[Guest]: essentially divided into regions.
[Guest]: They called it regions for whatever reason.
[Guest]: India was region one.
[Guest]: Europe was region two.
[Guest]: So all the countries in Europe are region two.
[Guest]: Region three was Latin America, so Mexico, Argentina, Brazil, and region four was United
[Guest]: States and Canada.
[Guest]: So I had one person for each of those.
[Guest]: So Vivek was for region three, which was Latin America.
[Guest]: Prakash was looking at the US portfolio.
[Guest]: Karna was looking at Europe.
[Guest]: So four people.
[Guest]: And then I had two other people.
[Guest]: One was looking at the medicines for malaria ventures, because we were developing a novel
[Guest]: molecule there.
[Guest]: So we were doing this at that point.
[Guest]: And thankfully, I had a few hands to help me.
[Guest]: Now, to answer the question that you're asking, how did I go about doing that?
[Guest]: In order to answer that question, I have to first explain to you how a generic drug is
[Guest]: developed.
[Guest]: So there are essentially four pieces to this.
[Guest]: So the first thing is that, remember, you're not innovating anything.
[Guest]: You know there is a product out there that works.
[Guest]: What we are trying to do is to figure out how to make it in a way that still produces
[Guest]: the same therapeutic benefit.
[Guest]: That is the question that we are trying to solve.
[Guest]: So the first thing that you need to do is to be able to figure out what is the formulation.
[Guest]: What I mean by formulation is, how do you deliver it to the patient?
[Guest]: Do you make a tablet out of it?
[Guest]: Do you make a capsule out of it?
[Guest]: Do you make an injectable out of it?
[Guest]: Do you make a liquid solution out of it?
[Guest]: That's number one.
[Guest]: Once you develop that in the lab, the next thing is, I can make it in a lab, like I can
[Guest]: make 5 milligrams of it or 10 milligrams of it.
[Guest]: How do I get it to scale?
[Guest]: How do I make 100 kilograms of this thing?
[Guest]: There is some science behind that.
[Guest]: So what works in lab will not work in a much higher scale facility.
[Guest]: So just like you can cook rajma for two people.
[Guest]: You can figure it out what the recipe is.
[Guest]: You have a party of 15 people.
[Guest]: You better be very careful with the recipe, otherwise, you really have to control all
[Guest]: of those things.
[Guest]: So scaling that process is also really, really important.
[Guest]: Once you do that, then the third thing is, you then take it to the clinic.
[Guest]: You're trying to test whether your formulation, the one that you made, does it mimic in the
[Guest]: body of a patient the way that the innovator's formulation does.
[Guest]: So if I'm trying to make a copy of Lipitor, which is autoverstatin, which is the drug
[Guest]: that is used right now, it's a best-selling drug for hypertension, blood pressure.
[Guest]: So if a patient takes Pfizer's autoverstatin, and this is how it behaves in the body, my
[Guest]: drug, my formulation has to behave kind of similar way, right?
[Guest]: Regulations say plus or minus 20%.
[Guest]: You have to be within that range of – there are two things that we measure in there.
[Guest]: One is how much drug is available and how fast does it excrete.
[Guest]: Now remember what happens when you take medicine, right?
[Guest]: Think about, for example, if you drink, I don't know whether you do or not, but if
[Guest]: you drink, you take one drink, you may not get a buzz.
[Guest]: You take a second drink, slowly you start getting, you know, to get a buzz.
[Guest]: Or maybe this is a better example, Holi, right?
[Guest]: Everybody has bhaan.
[Guest]: You can get a lassi or you can get, you know, matai and there is opium in it, right?
[Guest]: You take one bite, you don't feel anything.
[Guest]: You take a second bite, you kind of start feeling a little buzzy.
[Guest]: You take that one complete ladoo, then you start laughing, right?
[Guest]: Because you know, the concentration of that particular rupioid within your body essentially
[Guest]: gets to a point where it is really high at that point.
[Guest]: Now, the second thing that actually happens is that the body then excretes that out, right?
[Guest]: So either through urine you get it out, you know, through sweat you can get it out, right?
[Guest]: So again, if you over drink, what happens?
[Guest]: Start throwing up, right?
[Guest]: The body says, I can't handle it and just kind of vomits it out, right?
[Guest]: So these are, you know, processes that essentially sort of get the drug from our body.
[Guest]: So when you are testing this drug in the clinic, right, you're essentially trying to see what
[Guest]: is the highest concentration of that, you know, particular formulation, do you get to
[Guest]: that point, right?
[Guest]: And how fast does the body actually get it out of your system?
[Guest]: The reason why you need to do this is because doctors need to know when they write the prescription,
[Guest]: is it one pill a day, or do you have to take two times a day, or do you have to take once
[Guest]: after morning, after breakfast, after lunch, and after dinner?
[Guest]: How do you know that?
[Guest]: You know that because you've done these experiments to figure out your body takes eight hours
[Guest]: to get this drug out of your system, your body takes four hours to get it.
[Guest]: That's how you figure out whether you take it once a day, twice a day, three times a
[Guest]: day, right?
[Guest]: So you test it in the clinic.
[Guest]: The final part of this is you put it all together.
[Guest]: What you do is you put together a file and you say, this is how I made it in the lab,
[Guest]: this is how I scaled it up, this is how I tested it in the clinic.
[Guest]: And then, you know, I put it all together and say, okay, now I'm going to send it to
[Guest]: a regulator to say, this is what I need to do.
[Guest]: Now, in order for me to map out this entire process, I have to ask each of these guys
[Guest]: basically say, for each of these areas, look at the steps that are required, right?
[Guest]: So when you are scaling it up, how do you go from making, you know, five gram quantities
[Guest]: in the lab to 100 kilogram quantities, right?
[Guest]: How do you scale that up?
[Guest]: What are the processes involved in doing that?
[Guest]: Who did that?
[Guest]: Is there a lab notebook there?
[Guest]: Did somebody record that particular experiment that was done, right?
[Guest]: So we came up with a matrix of all of these activities for each drug.
[Guest]: And they were asked essentially to go and figure out where that data existed or not.
[Guest]: And this took forever because, you know, there were hurdles in every step of the way.
[Guest]: People wouldn't let them come into the labs.
[Guest]: People wouldn't give them information.
[Guest]: But over a period of time, we managed to develop a reasonably good idea of where the holes
[Amit Varma]: were.
[Amit Varma]: I just want to read out this little bit from the book which summarizes what you found where
[Amit Varma]: Catherine Iban writes, quote, at the behest of managers, the company's scientists substituted
[Amit Varma]: lower purity ingredients for higher ones to reduce costs.
[Amit Varma]: They altered test parameters so that formulations with higher impurities could be approved.
[Amit Varma]: They faked the solution studies to generate optimal results.
[Amit Varma]: They crushed up brand name drugs into capsules so that they could be tested in lieu of the
[Amit Varma]: company's own drugs.
[Amit Varma]: They superimposed brand name test results onto their own in applications.
[Amit Varma]: For some markets, the company fraudulently mixed and matched data streams, taking its
[Amit Varma]: best data from manufacturing in one market and presenting it to regulators elsewhere
[Amit Varma]: as data unique to the drugs in their market.
[Amit Varma]: For other markets, the company simply invented data.
[Amit Varma]: Document forgery was pervasive.
[Amit Varma]: The company even forged its own standard operating procedures, which FDA investigators rely on
[Amit Varma]: to assess whether a company is following its own policies.
[Amit Varma]: In one instance, the employees backdated documents and then artificially aged them in a steamy
[Amit Varma]: room overnight in an attempt to fool regulators during inspections, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And you've also spoken elsewhere about how the steam rooms were a part of the system
[Amit Varma]: in the sense that, you know, the FDA and other regulators have their systems in place that
[Amit Varma]: these are the processes by which drugs should be made and these are the processes by which
[Amit Varma]: we evaluate them.
[Amit Varma]: And Ranbaxy has a system within a system and the whole point of the system within a system
[Amit Varma]: is to subvert the other system.
[Amit Varma]: So you actually have a steam room where the only purpose is to forge documents and to
[Amit Varma]: make them look old.
[Amit Varma]: And there's another, I think, the gentleman in regulatory affairs who told you that, you
[Amit Varma]: told him that, okay, the data doesn't match the dossiers, what's going on here, how much
[Amit Varma]: of the data is forged?
[Guest]: What did he tell you?
[Guest]: Well, it varied.
[Guest]: I mean, I think in the stringent regulatory markets, like Europe and US, almost half of
[Guest]: it was.
[Guest]: And then I asked him, what do we do in India?
[Guest]: And he laughed at me and basically said, who looks for data in India?
[Amit Varma]: 100%?
[Amit Varma]: 100%.
[Amit Varma]: I just want to sit back and if you're listening to this, you should also sit back.
[Amit Varma]: This impacts real people.
[Amit Varma]: This means that if all the data that is coming to you, if you're in India or half the data
[Amit Varma]: in the US, if you're taking a generic made in India is forged at that point in time,
[Amit Varma]: the people making the medicine didn't give a shit about whether it works or not.
[Amit Varma]: And lives are at stake here.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, this is just bizarre.
[Amit Varma]: You can have any kind of medical condition and the medicine, the so called medicine can
[Amit Varma]: actually make it worse, because it's manufactured in this crazy manner where all the data is
[Guest]: forged.
[Guest]: Unfortunately, that's the truth.
[Guest]: And you know, the sad part about this, Amit, is that after this book came out, right after
[Guest]: this entire episode where the company pled guilty, paid fines, the biggest beneficiaries
[Guest]: of this are the patients in the United States and Europe.
[Guest]: Because the FDA got smart.
[Guest]: It started enforcing the regulations much more stringently.
[Guest]: It knows what to look.
[Guest]: Nothing's changed for us.
[Guest]: Nothing.
[Amit Varma]: Let's, let's get back to that story.
[Amit Varma]: You know, one of the things we uncovered was that data in entire markets was completely
[Amit Varma]: invented, like Brazil, Kenya, Ethiopia, Uganda, Egypt, Myanmar, Thailand, Vietnam, Peru, Dominican
[Amit Varma]: Republic.
[Amit Varma]: And at one point, you know, this lady called Kathy Spree joined the US office of Ranbaxy.
[Amit Varma]: And at first, she was really impressed by the results of the generic versions of Rionet
[Amit Varma]: and Sorted because she said, wow, Ranbaxy's data is so good, you could actually superimpose
[Amit Varma]: it on the data of the originals.
[Amit Varma]: And the truth was that the data had been taken from there.
[Amit Varma]: And at one point, and this really just struck me so hard, at one point where she was on
[Amit Varma]: a conference call with company executives from India, she spoke about, you know, that
[Amit Varma]: the AIDS medicine that Ranbaxy is supplying to Africa, it probably doesn't work.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the company's top executives said, quote, who cares, it's just blacks dying,
[Guest]: stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, unfortunately, that's true.
[Amit Varma]: Just reading about this stuff just gives me goosebumps, right?
[Amit Varma]: And it's just completely shocking to me.
[Amit Varma]: You're getting this shit in real time.
[Guest]: Yes, unfortunately, it's true.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, sometimes what happens is that in the middle of something, right?
[Guest]: And there's so much happening around you, you don't get a chance to sort of internalize
[Guest]: and think about this thing in the way that you ought to, right?
[Guest]: The benefit of hindsight, you know, that quote about, you know, just the blacks dying, it's
[Guest]: so offensive.
[Guest]: It is so offensive.
[Guest]: And the interesting thing is that Cathy says that not one person on the call objected to
[Guest]: it.
[Amit Varma]: It just blows my mind.
[Amit Varma]: So what's happening there?
[Amit Varma]: You've gathered this data, this data is incredible.
[Amit Varma]: It is incredible to the point of being unbelievable that here is a company with more than a billion
[Amit Varma]: dollars in sales, more than 100 million of that from the US.
[Amit Varma]: I don't know if these are 2001 figures, or these were the figures at the time.
[Amit Varma]: But obviously, with ambitions of getting much bigger, you know, Bill Clinton has come and
[Amit Varma]: he's partied with Malvinder and Shivender and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And you've got this data where everything is based on lies.
[Amit Varma]: So one, what's going through?
[Amit Varma]: What are you and your team thinking?
[Amit Varma]: And two, what happens next?
[Guest]: So you know, we used to sort of as a team, we used to meet once a week, because these
[Guest]: guys used to travel, right?
[Guest]: So he used to travel to Devas, Devas was an MP, was a very big manufacturing facility.
[Guest]: They used to go up to Ponta Saheb, that's again, a fairly large manufacturing facility.
[Guest]: Goa, Goa was a very big manufacturing facility.
[Guest]: So all my guys used to travel so that you could go look on the ground what was really
[Guest]: happening.
[Guest]: So the process was Monday morning, we met in office, and then everybody went their own
[Guest]: way, did whatever they needed to do, come back on Monday.
[Guest]: And I used to meet with Raj on Tuesday, because I used to collect all that data, essentially
[Guest]: compile it and then go see him every week kind of, you know, so some weeks he was traveling.
[Guest]: So he wasn't around.
[Guest]: But someday, the week that he was there, I used to go see him and tell him, look, this
[Guest]: is how far we got.
[Guest]: We had great difficulty getting data.
[Guest]: But at some point when the picture began to emerge, and when I told him that this is what
[Guest]: it is, he didn't believe me.
[Guest]: He said, there must be something really wrong.
[Guest]: I mean, how is it possible that, you know, there is so much of this kind of, you know,
[Guest]: issues that you're dealing with?
[Guest]: You can't have a portfolio of a company where all the data is missing.
[Guest]: Go back and redo this.
[Guest]: So after a while, I just got like, you don't believe me.
[Guest]: I mean, I'm telling you what I've heard, what I have.
[Guest]: You don't believe me.
[Guest]: So why don't you come next Monday morning when I meet with my group, why don't you come
[Guest]: and join our meeting?
[Guest]: So he did.
[Guest]: And he heard from people, all of them across the table.
[Guest]: We sat down and basically people told him, look, this is what it is.
[Guest]: After that meeting, I think the penny dropped for him too.
[Guest]: And he was really upset.
[Guest]: And he basically said, I just I can't believe this nonsense is going on.
[Guest]: I need you to prepare, you know, a sort of a summary of how far you've come along here.
[Guest]: I need you to give it to me in terms of what was really happening.
[Guest]: So that was the first time I actually put together a spreadsheet, you know, because
[Guest]: there were multiple pieces of information to the spreadsheet that was there, you know,
[Guest]: that was a consolidated was that was the first time that I did.
[Guest]: There was a business development meeting in Bangkok.
[Guest]: And part of on the sidelines of that meeting, he was supposed to be meeting with Brian and
[Guest]: and the business heads in Malvinder and everybody else.
[Guest]: He said, give me that spreadsheet.
[Guest]: Let me take it.
[Guest]: I'm going to go talk to them.
[Guest]: And, you know, so that was the first time that he told, you know, this is what was happening.
[Guest]: After he came back, you know, we continue doing this and, you know, another month and
[Guest]: a half, month, month and a half after that, you know, he said, give me a PowerPoint presentation.
[Guest]: So I made a PowerPoint presentation, gave it to him.
[Guest]: This was discussed in the scientific subcommittee of the board of directors.
[Guest]: He made the presentation.
[Guest]: Not one person basically said anything.
[Guest]: There was one scientist, Nityanand, who basically said, you know, we really need to do something
[Guest]: to fix this.
[Guest]: Everybody else said, just destroy it, get rid of the laptop, get rid of this, that and
[Guest]: the other.
[Guest]: And he was very honest.
[Guest]: He told me when he came back from the meeting, he said, I know how to fix it.
[Guest]: The right way to do this is to withdraw the entire portfolio, be honest with, you know,
[Guest]: the regulators, tell them that you have a problem.
[Guest]: We will redo the thing, bottom up, clean this thing up.
[Guest]: Yes, there's going to be a short term loss to the company.
[Guest]: Next couple of quarters, we're not going to make our numbers.
[Guest]: But it will emerge stronger if you do this thing right.
[Guest]: Nothing, this pin drop silence in the room.
[Guest]: He came back that evening.
[Guest]: He says, I'm leaving.
[Guest]: Next day he resigned and walked away.
[Amit Varma]: No, and just to be clear about, you know, what happened in that meeting, which is again
[Amit Varma]: so revelatory of people's approaches, is that the shock and horror that was in that meeting
[Amit Varma]: was not about the fact that these things are happening, that we basically lied about everything.
[Amit Varma]: The shock and horror is that someone has collected this data, and they could get caught.
[Amit Varma]: So they immediately say not only destroy all copies of this PowerPoint presentation, but
[Amit Varma]: destroy the laptop that it was made on.
[Amit Varma]: So the entire laptop was taken from Mr. Kumar and destroyed basically, and the hammer was
[Amit Varma]: used and destroyed and luckily copies existed, including a copy with you, which, you know,
[Amit Varma]: is useful later in the story and keeps in fact cropping up at different parts of the
[Amit Varma]: story, which is really interesting.
[Amit Varma]: So he comes back and he quits.
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, he basically, I think the next day he resigned, and then they actually had
[Guest]: a charade.
[Guest]: They basically didn't tell the street.
[Guest]: They said that his mom was there, they went back to the UK, some shenanigans.
[Guest]: So they did they until January, they did not disclose to the street that the head of R&D
[Guest]: had resigned.
[Guest]: That was probably a big issue, losing two heads of R&D in quick succession, right?
[Amit Varma]: So they covered it up, didn't say anything.
[Amit Varma]: Another sort of incident struck me and this happened, I think, much earlier, around the
[Amit Varma]: time Rashmi Barbahia was leaving, where you pointed out that you had no idea why he had
[Amit Varma]: left and exactly what the deal was.
[Amit Varma]: But your son Ishaan, who was three years old, he had an ear infection.
[Amit Varma]: And you first gave him Ranbaxy's version of Amoxiclav, which was generic, and it didn't
[Amit Varma]: seem to help at all.
[Amit Varma]: And the moment you shifted him to the brand name version, it worked.
[Amit Varma]: And this is something that has happened throughout the world, and is known to doctors everywhere.
[Amit Varma]: Like Iban in her book, describes in great detail about how in America, at various points
[Amit Varma]: in time, doctors basically knew, they realized that if you're on the brand name version of
[Amit Varma]: a medicine, it's fine.
[Amit Varma]: But the moment you shift to a generic, either you adjust the dosage and give the person
[Amit Varma]: much more of it to make sure that you have the equivalent amount of the drug, or if it
[Amit Varma]: doesn't work, and in some cases, it took lives.
[Amit Varma]: And if it doesn't work, you shift back to the brand name version.
[Amit Varma]: And the political incentives are, of course, to keep the generic versions as popular as
[Amit Varma]: possible because the government is spending 18% of GDP on healthcare.
[Amit Varma]: And generics are a big part of that.
[Amit Varma]: And in Africa, also, there are these, you know, vivid reports from Iban and others of
[Amit Varma]: how everyone in hospitals knew that you have a bunch of brand name medicines in a corner
[Amit Varma]: somewhere for an emergency, but you give generics to the other people, and they probably don't
[Amit Varma]: work.
[Amit Varma]: And Ranbaxy in particular was one name to avoid, but not just Ranbaxy, like through
[Amit Varma]: this book, there are mentions of Walkhard and Dr. Reddy's and so on.
[Amit Varma]: The list is kind of almost feels endless.
[Amit Varma]: So at this stage, when Dr. Kumar has left, right, and you are left with your team, and
[Amit Varma]: you realize why he's left, you realize that what is happening is criminal, that is costing
[Amit Varma]: lives for sure.
[Amit Varma]: And that's in fact, one of the great examples of the seen and the unseen, where what is
[Amit Varma]: unseen here is actually incalculable, like the lives lost or impacted through this, there's
[Amit Varma]: just no way to calculate it, because a medicine did not work, or because there was an impurity
[Amit Varma]: and it worked in the wrong way, there's no way.
[Amit Varma]: So what now?
[Amit Varma]: Dr. Kumar is left, you are left with your team.
[Guest]: What are you thinking?
[Guest]: So obviously, I mean, I was a known target at that point in time, because they knew I
[Guest]: was the one who actually collected that data, right.
[Guest]: So they sent the internal audit group after me, the guys just, you know, they essentially
[Guest]: sort of descended on my department, stayed there for almost like a month and a half,
[Guest]: dug through everything they possibly could, didn't find anything.
[Guest]: And then finally, I think what they did was they planted some URLs in the IP table to
[Guest]: say that I was browsing porn on my computer.
[Guest]: That was the thing that they wanted to make an issue out of, that somehow I was violating
[Guest]: company policy, I was browsing porn from work.
[Guest]: And fortunately, I also had an IT department in mind, because, you know, we were doing
[Guest]: a lot of, you know, systems installation.
[Guest]: So Sanjay Munshi was the guy who was a network administrator.
[Guest]: He was the one who looked it up and found it, that it was being planted from the corporate
[Guest]: office.
[Guest]: Once I found that, then I knew exactly what the gig was up.
[Guest]: So I went to Brian and basically told him, look, can't work this way, right?
[Guest]: I mean, how would you like to work?
[Guest]: Every second minute, you have to look over your shoulder, trying to figure out who's
[Guest]: going to come after you with a dagger, it just doesn't work like this.
[Guest]: I can't, you know, this is not a way that I will survive here.
[Guest]: And he was fine with it.
[Guest]: He was like, okay, that's fine.
[Guest]: I said, you know, he asked me, what is, what are you going to do?
[Guest]: I said, I don't know, I'm going to try and figure out something else to do here.
[Guest]: So it's like, that's fine, you know, Monday, go Monday, turn in your things and pick up
[Guest]: your personal effects and, you know, we'll settle your last and final whatever the thing
[Guest]: that you know, what was owed to you at that point and I'm a salary wise, I'll settle that.
[Guest]: That was it.
[Amit Varma]: That was the end of it.
[Amit Varma]: And when you sort of landed up to take your things, you took the pictures of your kids
[Amit Varma]: from the desk, but you weren't even allowed to open it.
[Guest]: No, because the problem was that the drawers actually contained a lot of handwritten notes
[Guest]: of people who were interviewed.
[Guest]: You know, so my guys had done a lot of interviews, I had done a lot of interviews, and we had
[Guest]: handwritten notes of who we spoke to, when we spoke to what did we find, the drawers
[Guest]: actually contained a lot of those handwritten notes.
[Guest]: And obviously, that was not something that I was able to do and let me, you know, lay
[Guest]: my hands on.
[Guest]: So I got to, I got to collect Mishant's picture.
[Guest]: I had some personal effects, you know, on the table that I did that.
[Guest]: And that was it.
[Guest]: That was the end of it.
[Guest]: They physically stood there and stopped.
[Guest]: So there was this HR manager, his name was Udbhav Ganju.
[Guest]: He was the director of HR and a security person.
[Guest]: Both of them essentially stood over my shoulder.
[Guest]: It took all of like five minutes.
[Guest]: On Monday morning, I went in there, I took the picture, I collected my pictures and had
[Guest]: some BMS personal effects on the table.
[Guest]: So I took that, it took all of five minutes and they walked me off of there.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, it's insane.
[Amit Varma]: No, I, you know, one of the things that struck me from Iban's book also, is that as I was
[Amit Varma]: reading through it, I was entering little rabbit holes in the site, googling all the
[Amit Varma]: names of the people and thinking to myself that surely this person's career was over
[Amit Varma]: at this point.
[Amit Varma]: But they all continue to flourish in the pharma business.
[Amit Varma]: All of these people who admitted to these wrongdoings, who forged documents, whose actions
[Amit Varma]: certainly led to so many deaths, they all continue to flourish in the business.
[Guest]: Unfortunately, that's the sad truth of how this industry works.
[Amit Varma]: So this has happened and meanwhile, there's a lot of other cloak and dagger stuff going
[Amit Varma]: on within the company, little politics like after DS Brar goes, Brian Tempest takes over
[Amit Varma]: as CEO and later on Malvinder basically takes over himself and in 2008, you know, the company
[Amit Varma]: is sold to this Japanese company, the FDA investigation is completely hidden from them.
[Amit Varma]: What do you do?
[Amit Varma]: So you quit, you kind of go back home and you had, of course, shifted bag and baggage
[Amit Varma]: to Gurgaon, not something I would, you know, necessarily envy being there.
[Amit Varma]: And there's an early part of the book, which mentions an interesting incident, which also
[Amit Varma]: I found kind of revelatory and it's, you know, credit to Iban, I think to put that incident
[Amit Varma]: in because it does reveal character, it tells you a little bit more about what's going to
[Amit Varma]: come where she talks about this traffic accident, which you witness, where your driver is driving
[Amit Varma]: you through a particular part of the road and you see that someone after an accident
[Amit Varma]: is lying there injured and your driver's instinct, as honestly, I think most people in India's
[Amit Varma]: would be, is just drive on, don't get involved with this shit.
[Amit Varma]: But you stop, you take the person in the car and bleeding, injured, whatever you take that
[Amit Varma]: person to hospital, and because the doctor asked for some money up front, you pay seven
[Amit Varma]: eight thousand rupees, whatever it is, and you go away.
[Amit Varma]: And the next day at Ranbaxy, the cops visit you and they are trying to frame you for running
[Amit Varma]: over a dead person.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: So that they can extract something out of you and your HR settles it.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: He makes him go away.
[Guest]: I don't know what he did, but he made them go away.
[Amit Varma]: So yeah, so clearly.
[Guest]: So maybe the same Mr. Ganju, I don't know if he was Mr. Ganju.
[Guest]: So Mr. Ganju was the head of HR and there's another gentleman who worked with him very
[Guest]: closely.
[Guest]: His name is Mohan Ahuja.
[Guest]: Both of them were very well connected and they made them go away.
[Amit Varma]: Wow.
[Amit Varma]: Fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: So you've quit.
[Amit Varma]: Now, obviously, you're despondent.
[Amit Varma]: What are the different things going through your head?
[Amit Varma]: Because you've got a young family and your skills, in a sense, the industry is not ready
[Amit Varma]: for them.
[Amit Varma]: So you're not really going to get a job right away in India.
[Amit Varma]: And eventually you do with Infosys and all of that and you have to move back to the US.
[Amit Varma]: But in the interim, you're sitting in your basement in Gurgaon, you're processing all
[Amit Varma]: of this.
[Amit Varma]: What's your state of mind?
[Amit Varma]: What do you want to do?
[Amit Varma]: At what point do you decide that I can't walk away?
[Guest]: I can't let this rest?
[Guest]: Two things, as you said, right?
[Guest]: I think that I did approach other companies, you know, offered my services, but they were
[Guest]: not ready because they didn't recognize the value of what I was doing.
[Guest]: Why do you need somebody who can do all of this stuff?
[Guest]: We know how to manage our own portfolios, so that was one.
[Guest]: The second thing, I mean, then I started looking at IT services companies, actually worked
[Guest]: with Tata Consultancy as well.
[Guest]: Again, it's the same situation, you don't need somebody to do the skill that I bring
[Guest]: to the table, right?
[Guest]: So it never worked out.
[Guest]: And so I started thinking about, okay, what do I do now?
[Guest]: Because going back to the U.S. was an option, but then moving my entire family back again,
[Guest]: trying to start again from scratch, and even there, I didn't have a job at this point.
[Guest]: I mean, I have to find some work and start again from scratch.
[Guest]: It's not easy to do that.
[Guest]: And remember, this is when, in 2007, 2008, this is when the entire market collapsed.
[Guest]: People weren't hiring, nothing was really sort of happening in the market.
[Guest]: People who I knew were employed were essentially being laid off at that point.
[Guest]: Why would you want to hire somebody who left you for two years ago, wanted to go to India?
[Guest]: So what does he have to offer to you at that point in time?
[Guest]: And there's so much other mayhem happening in the economy at that point in time.
[Guest]: So it took a while to sort of think through all of these things.
[Guest]: The trouble is, when you're not sort of focused on doing something productive, then your mind
[Guest]: sort of reflects back on the things that you've experienced.
[Guest]: And I had nothing better to do at that point in time.
[Guest]: The two other guys who came with me, Dinesh Kasturi and Venkat, they also were in a difficult
[Guest]: position.
[Guest]: So all three of us were in really, really bad shape.
[Guest]: But unfortunately, the thing is, one was the fact that I didn't have anything to do, number
[Guest]: one.
[Guest]: Number two was the fact that I'm the kind of person who kind of doesn't react immediately.
[Guest]: I reflect on these things and kind of store it, and after that, I do something.
[Guest]: And so my initial reaction was very simple.
[Guest]: I said, like, fine, okay, I did what I needed to do.
[Guest]: It ended.
[Guest]: I have to move on.
[Guest]: There's not much more I can do about it.
[Guest]: But then I started talking to Raj about this a little bit.
[Guest]: He used to be in the UK, so we used to talk once in a while.
[Guest]: And I used to tell him, look, is this it?
[Guest]: You walked away.
[Guest]: You basically said, okay, this is mine.
[Guest]: I'm not going to deal with this anymore, and we walked away.
[Guest]: I lost my job.
[Guest]: Are we done?
[Guest]: Are we done with our responsibilities here?
[Guest]: A lot of these discussions over a period of time came to the point that I felt that I
[Guest]: needed to do something more than just sort of saying that I washed my hands off of the
[Guest]: situation.
[Guest]: I'm done with my thing.
[Guest]: And that's the reason why it took a while for me to kind of sort of think over this.
[Guest]: What do I do?
[Guest]: How do I do it?
[Guest]: I also understand.
[Guest]: I mean, there are a lot of people here basically said, look, if you go out and do something
[Guest]: and be public, realize that this is a big company.
[Guest]: They have lots of connections.
[Guest]: By the time there was also anecdotes about boardroom brawls, the brothers beating each
[Guest]: other up, like dirty stuff, right?
[Guest]: I mean, you don't like, you know, why do you want to sort of put yourself out there?
[Guest]: You know, this was a counter narrative, you know, saying, you know, this is how things
[Guest]: get done in India.
[Guest]: You know, you if you want to do something about it, just shut up and go about doing
[Guest]: your own thing.
[Guest]: Reinvent yourself.
[Guest]: There's nothing more you can do about it.
[Guest]: So it took a while for all of this to kind of, you know, gestate and come to a point
[Guest]: where it was important for me to be able to do something about it.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, in fact, just talking about the environment, I mean, whistleblowers in India haven't, you
[Amit Varma]: haven't really flourished.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, you look at Manjunath and others who were basically murdered and in Iqbal's book,
[Amit Varma]: there's this other conversation she reports between Malvinder and Jay Deshmukh, the lawyer,
[Amit Varma]: where towards the end, at one point, they are fighting and they're fighting over exactly
[Amit Varma]: this.
[Amit Varma]: And Malvinder tells Jay Deshmukh that, you know, I know where you live.
[Amit Varma]: And Deshmukh says, of course, you know, where you where I live, you've come home, you fool.
[Amit Varma]: And then he says that, you know, my brother founded the Shiv Sinha or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: He had relatives who had, so there are these kind of threats going around and it's kind
[Amit Varma]: of messy.
[Amit Varma]: Before we get to the next part of the story, where you send an email to the FDA or driven
[Amit Varma]: by conscience.
[Amit Varma]: Before we get to the next part of that, there's a little bit of musing I have here.
[Amit Varma]: One is that when historians come on the show, I asked them about what they think of the
[Amit Varma]: great man theory of history.
[Amit Varma]: And this is, of course, something that people battle about, where there'll be one theory
[Amit Varma]: that history is basically made by great men and unfortunately, only great men is gendered
[Amit Varma]: because that's, you know, we've been, our species has been sexist and misogynist all
[Amit Varma]: along.
[Amit Varma]: And it's men who tend to make and write history.
[Amit Varma]: But one is that there are these men who do important things and the course of the world
[Amit Varma]: changes.
[Amit Varma]: And that's one theory.
[Amit Varma]: And the other theory is that no, there are currents of history and the people who appear
[Amit Varma]: to be great men are people who just came along and wrote those currents, but things would
[Amit Varma]: have happened anyway.
[Amit Varma]: Now, I don't want to ask you for your opinion on what historians themselves argue about
[Amit Varma]: all the time, but it strikes me that it's a bit of a happenstance that events unfolded
[Amit Varma]: the way they did, that Ranbaxy was exposed, that they apologized, that we know that they
[Amit Varma]: did all these things.
[Amit Varma]: Otherwise, it sounds like a wild conspiracy theory.
[Amit Varma]: And all of it really comes down in a sense to one man.
[Amit Varma]: And that's you.
[Amit Varma]: For example, not just one man, but circumstances.
[Amit Varma]: Had you found a job immediately, maybe you would have been diverted.
[Amit Varma]: Had you spoken with your wife and she would have discouraged you surely, correctly so,
[Amit Varma]: because you got to be practical and you did what you did.
[Guest]: You're absolutely right.
[Guest]: I mean, I am a big believer in the second theory.
[Guest]: I mean, I think that it's hubris to think about the fact that, you know, a man or a
[Guest]: group of men changed the course of history.
[Amit Varma]: I don't know.
[Guest]: But in this case, that's what, I mean, it's by happenstance, kind of.
[Guest]: No, but the circumstances actually enable you to do that, right?
[Guest]: I think the most important thing, you know, whenever I get asked about this, right?
[Guest]: I was lucky.
[Guest]: I was lucky because for whatever reason in my life, I had very strong role models, very,
[Guest]: very strong role models.
[Guest]: My dad is one of them, Raj is one of them.
[Guest]: I think that that is essentially, you know, made me react in the way that I reacted.
[Guest]: But the circumstances are not mine.
[Guest]: Circumstances was created by a number of different people around it.
[Amit Varma]: But they're kind of accidental.
[Amit Varma]: Like, what if the Infosys job came about just when you left Ranbaxy and you?
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, counterfactuals are always there, right?
[Guest]: You can always think about counterfactuals, would have been as aggressive.
[Guest]: But I have an answer to the Infosys job question.
[Guest]: You see, what happened was, even while working for Infosys, I was working with the USFDA
[Guest]: until a point where they essentially told me, go get a lawyer, we cannot protect you
[Guest]: anymore, right?
[Guest]: I had no idea that this statute existed in the law, right?
[Guest]: For almost two years, 18 months or so, I was meeting with, you know, the USFDA inspectors,
[Guest]: you know, answering questions, you know, what they were doing, helping them map out, you
[Guest]: know, what, you know, what they were doing.
[Guest]: I mean, the raid, Valentine's Day raid in Princeton, a lot of this thing actually happened
[Guest]: while I was still employed at Infosys.
[Guest]: I was doing my day job, at night I used to do this.
[Guest]: So who's to say that even if I got the Infosys job right away, after I, you know, after I
[Guest]: quit Ranbaxy, I wouldn't still have done that?
[Guest]: Because you see, at the end of the day, I have to look at myself in the mirror and say,
[Guest]: did you do what you're supposed to do, right?
[Guest]: Nobody can answer that.
[Guest]: Raj can't answer it, my dad can't answer it.
[Guest]: At the end of the day, I have to answer that to myself.
[Amit Varma]: Fair enough.
[Amit Varma]: But the other moment of happenstance that strikes me is earlier on, if you look at a
[Amit Varma]: counterfactual when you're at BMS, and you decide that, hey, I'm in America.
[Amit Varma]: This is a dream of any Indian born in the 60s or 70s.
[Amit Varma]: You know, why should I leave?
[Amit Varma]: Why should I go back?
[Amit Varma]: Let me enjoy myself here and you stay back there.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, you and your team is never at Ranbaxy.
[Amit Varma]: And perhaps when Rajkumar wants his data, he doesn't even get it.
[Amit Varma]: There's no one to get it for him.
[Guest]: And that could also happen.
[Guest]: That could very well have happened.
[Guest]: I mean, again, you know, when you look back and say, okay, why did it happen?
[Guest]: Why did it have to happen this way?
[Guest]: I don't have an answer for that.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: I mean, if I had decided at that point in time, you know what, I'm on a fast track to
[Guest]: become a VP at BMS.
[Guest]: I'm going to stick around for another five years, I'm going to become a VP very easily,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: A cushy life, well paying job, you know, perfectly, you know, sort of happy with my son.
[Guest]: Nothing to complain about, right?
[Guest]: But at some point, you have to still ask yourself, and I still have to ask myself, okay, right?
[Guest]: At what point do you transition from being responsible to your family, immediate family,
[Guest]: to your responsibility toward a larger society?
[Amit Varma]: I don't have an answer.
[Amit Varma]: That's a legit question for after you uncovered what is at Ranbaxy.
[Amit Varma]: And I completely buy that at that point, everything was inevitably going to where it led to.
[Amit Varma]: You would have to do this.
[Amit Varma]: I buy that.
[Amit Varma]: But you may not have been at Ranbaxy in the first place.
[Guest]: But anyway, that's it.
[Guest]: No, it's fascinating.
[Guest]: Like, the reason I say this is as follows, right?
[Guest]: So in 2007, I started a company here in Bombay, right?
[Guest]: So it was based in Westboro in Massachusetts, but we had people here working.
[Guest]: And I grew it to, you know, a reasonable size as a CEO and a step down in 2012, a lot of
[Guest]: lessons there as well.
[Guest]: One of the reasons why that company did that well was because we were standing in the path
[Guest]: of social change.
[Guest]: Industry was reinventing itself, they needed that skill, we just happened to be there.
[Guest]: I can't, I mean, I can claim success because I had a fantastic team, we did an amazing
[Guest]: job.
[Guest]: But I can't take away from the fact that that exact model, if it was two years earlier or
[Guest]: two years late, we wouldn't have succeeded, right?
[Guest]: Sometimes you find yourself in this situation, right?
[Guest]: And you think that you're the greatest thing since sliced bread, you're not.
[Guest]: You're just standing in the path of social change.
[Guest]: And if you're stupid enough to think that you're the one who's driving it, there's something
[Guest]: coming for you, right?
[Guest]: Have the humility to understand where you stand.
[Guest]: And by God's grace, if you've been given the humility to understand how to leverage that,
[Amit Varma]: then you make something out of it.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, you spoke about how, you know, if you were two years too early or two years too
[Amit Varma]: late, it wouldn't have worked.
[Amit Varma]: And I just thought back to something like I've just moved house and we were unpacking
[Amit Varma]: a lot of old boxes.
[Amit Varma]: And my wife came across this old article which came in business week in the year 2000, which
[Amit Varma]: was about me.
[Amit Varma]: I had done this startup then called Sonic Town with a friend of mine, which was basically
[Amit Varma]: iTunes plus Myspace, what they went on to become.
[Amit Varma]: You know, we had cut deals with record labels in the US that we would sell digital music.
[Amit Varma]: And I was making the case that all your CDs will be defunct and everyone's going to listen
[Amit Varma]: to digital music.
[Amit Varma]: And I remember going to New York in the middle of 2000 sometime, made a presentation to a
[Amit Varma]: bunch of venture capitalists, impressed some of them enough that they committed some money
[Amit Varma]: to us.
[Amit Varma]: And then the Nasdaq crash happens and everything goes to hell.
[Amit Varma]: So we were way before our time, in a sense, and it all kind of went to hell.
[Amit Varma]: And I said, Okay, never gonna be an entrepreneur again.
[Amit Varma]: One could argue that in these modern times, every creator is one.
[Amit Varma]: But let's let's now get back to your story.
[Amit Varma]: You're in your basement, you boot up your laptop, and you send an email to the FDA,
[Amit Varma]: because you've decided that I can't keep this inside of me, there's too much at stake.
[Amit Varma]: I have to let them know.
[Amit Varma]: Now what is that process like?
[Amit Varma]: Because like, what did you expect?
[Amit Varma]: Like, did you think that, okay, it'll be a simple one step thing that I send them the
[Amit Varma]: details and they look into it and things get sorted out?
[Amit Varma]: What happened?
[Amit Varma]: Take me through the process of what then?
[Guest]: Because I mean, my experience there collecting this data told me that there was a stake in
[Guest]: it for the World Health Organization, right?
[Guest]: Because they were the ones who were essentially telling all of these countries in South Africa
[Guest]: that, yeah, you know, we can vouch for, you know, what you can buy from Grand Maxi.
[Guest]: It was the UK's regulator, you know, Medicines and Health Regulatory Agency, because they
[Guest]: were also involved in buying a lot of stuff from the US FDA.
[Guest]: My expectation was that they needed to know that this is what is the reality.
[Guest]: And they would do something about it in the sense that, you know, either they would be
[Guest]: more diligent in terms of evaluating the information that the company is providing in their applications
[Guest]: to ask for marketing authorization, or they would come and do better inspections, right?
[Guest]: Because I knew where the holes were at that point in time.
[Guest]: That was what my expectations were.
[Guest]: I got a very nice email from the World Health Organization saying, thank you very much.
[Guest]: We'll look into it.
[Guest]: That was the end of it.
[Guest]: UK never responded.
[Guest]: US, you know, over a period of time, I think what had happened was I managed to sort of
[Guest]: build some confidence over a period of time, because, you know what, I started sending
[Guest]: them information bit by bit, because I didn't want to overwhelm them saying, okay, I mean,
[Guest]: nobody would have believed, to be very honest with you.
[Guest]: And then this is exactly what happened.
[Guest]: So when I was told to go get a lawyer, just before the raid was executed, and I actually,
[Guest]: you know, spoke to Andrew, who's my good friend right now.
[Guest]: And when I told him what was happening, he thought I was crazy.
[Guest]: It's like, you're telling me the largest genetic drug company in the United States
[Guest]: is selling all of these drugs with fudge data, and you're telling me that you know this for
[Guest]: sure?
[Guest]: He didn't believe me to begin with, right?
[Guest]: And over a period of time, he also kind of, you know, got convinced that that was true.
[Guest]: That would have been the reaction if I told, you know, the USFDA, right, a friend that
[Guest]: look, guys, you know, you guys are not doing a right job, you know, there's wool being
[Guest]: pulled over your eyes, they would have laughed me out of the room.
[Guest]: This was the largest genetic company in the United States.
[Guest]: This was a company that actually had the first to file for the largest selling drug, Lipitor,
[Guest]: $12 billion drug.
[Guest]: Who's going to believe somebody who's saying something like this, right?
[Guest]: So I had to write to them over a period of time, and it kind of took a while for them
[Guest]: to appreciate what I was saying.
[Guest]: Plus, again, you know, it always comes down to one or two conscientious people, right?
[Guest]: So there was this gentleman named Edwin Rivera Martinez, who passed away, you know, bless
[Guest]: his soul.
[Guest]: He was the head of criminal investigations at that point.
[Guest]: Edwin took interest in it.
[Guest]: I didn't know, I met him a long, I mean, after the case ended many, many times, many years
[Guest]: later, I met with him.
[Guest]: He was the one who took interest in this.
[Guest]: And then there was another, later on, the true hero of the story is this lady who was
[Guest]: a criminal investigator in the US, Debbie Robinson.
[Guest]: Without her, this case would have unraveled, you know, like nothing would have happened
[Guest]: in this particular case.
[Guest]: This woman theory of history.
[Guest]: Seriously.
[Guest]: She's the one who drove this thing to fruition.
[Guest]: And if you meet with her, you will see, you know, I mean, she's no nonsense.
[Guest]: She comes from the IRS, the revenue side, walks with a, you know, holster, you know,
[Guest]: with a gun.
[Guest]: You're in awe of the kind of person, I mean, she knocked heads, a bunch of people and made
[Guest]: it happen.
[Guest]: So again, it comes down to conscientious people trying to do the right thing.
[Guest]: Happened to be in the right place at the right time.
[Guest]: If it was not for Edwin, if it was not for Debbie, this case would have never resolved
[Guest]: itself.
[Guest]: It would have been in some dusty box someplace else.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And it's kind of fascinating how it takes months and years to kind of unravel where
[Amit Varma]: it takes time for you to win their trust.
[Amit Varma]: And when they do their inspections, for example, the FDA has to carry out these inspections
[Amit Varma]: in India.
[Amit Varma]: And typically everywhere else, like in the US, for example, when the FDA does inspections,
[Amit Varma]: you've pointed out that they're all surprise inspections, so you can't prepare for them.
[Amit Varma]: But in India, because of visas and all that, the companies know well in advance, they know
[Amit Varma]: what to do.
[Amit Varma]: So everything is sanitized.
[Amit Varma]: These people are guided through.
[Amit Varma]: But because of the kind of inputs that you were giving, they now knew what to look for
[Amit Varma]: in which factory, what kind of data to look at and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So when did the penny start dropping that everything that you were saying was true?
[Guest]: After the first inspection, when they went to Ponta Saheb in 2008, and then they found
[Guest]: out that they were fudging data, the first thing was very simple.
[Guest]: So what happens is that when the US FDA comes to inspect, at the end of an inspection, they
[Guest]: give you a report, it's called the Form 483, and they write down what is it that they found
[Guest]: on that inspection.
[Guest]: So it's very transparent.
[Guest]: They come, they do the inspection, at the end of the inspection, they do a briefing,
[Guest]: they get the senior management in a room, they tell them, look, this is what we did,
[Guest]: this is what we found, it is a report that we're giving.
[Guest]: And so it's a draft report, it's not final, they give them an opportunity to actually
[Guest]: provide feedback, and then it gets finalized.
[Guest]: The first thing that is on that report is that when you walk into the manufacturing
[Guest]: facility at the gate, they have registers of who's coming and going.
[Guest]: They were telling the US FDA, there were certain people who came in and did all this work.
[Guest]: There was no record of those people ever being in that.
[Guest]: So you start with there, right, and then you start digging and start unraveling, then you
[Guest]: find the steam room, then you find stuff that is happening behind the scenes.
[Guest]: So unfortunately, after the first inspection, they figured out that, look, this guy is not
[Guest]: smoking pot or whatever, what he's saying is actually true.
[Guest]: So after that, I think there was some confidence that came in, look, he's saying what he's
[Guest]: saying.
[Amit Varma]: And what's the process that now happens?
[Amit Varma]: In 2008, towards the end of that year, for example, Ranbaxy sold off to the Japanese
[Amit Varma]: company.
[Amit Varma]: There also, there's this interesting storyline that, you know, Jay Deshmukh, who is, you
[Amit Varma]: know, legal representative, is called into this meeting, and he doesn't realize that
[Amit Varma]: it's over an acquisition.
[Amit Varma]: He thinks it's some kind of business deal.
[Amit Varma]: And he says, hey, no, no, everything is kosher, and the FDA is just investigating some random
[Amit Varma]: minor thing.
[Amit Varma]: Even though they know what the FDA is investigating by now, that famous PowerPoint presentation
[Amit Varma]: is with the FDA, it's been spotted on their desk, and all of that, all of that has happened.
[Amit Varma]: And then after the sale happens, Jay Deshmukh realizes that he actually had he known it
[Amit Varma]: was an acquisition, he would not have been able to pull off such a big lie.
[Amit Varma]: And that's when he and Malvinder have this fight that I know where you live, and all
[Amit Varma]: this kind of crazy nonsense happens.
[Amit Varma]: And all these people are thriving, by the way, just Google all these names from this
[Amit Varma]: book.
[Amit Varma]: They're all thriving.
[Amit Varma]: It's just shocking that these are murderers in my eyes.
[Amit Varma]: But anyway, so it takes many years, right?
[Amit Varma]: It takes many years.
[Amit Varma]: In that time, you get the job in Infosys, you have to go to the US, you know, leaving
[Amit Varma]: your family behind.
[Amit Varma]: And there's a poignant scene as described in the book, I don't know if you're comfortable
[Amit Varma]: talking about it, but your wife goes to the basement and you're holding your son and crying.
[Amit Varma]: And it's this whole thing, where you transition from being a man with a career he loves to
[Amit Varma]: being a man on a crusade of sorts with this larger cause.
[Amit Varma]: How does it affect your family?
[Guest]: Yeah, that's a tough one.
[Guest]: That's a tough one.
[Guest]: I mean, it's look, you know, I mean, if you look at it today, right, you know, it's a
[Guest]: broken family.
[Guest]: There's a man divorced right now.
[Guest]: It did affect the family because, you know, you can't sort of continue doing this within
[Guest]: and continue to live a normal life.
[Guest]: It doesn't work that way.
[Guest]: You know, I don't know, I mean, at that point in time, that felt the right thing for me
[Guest]: to do.
[Guest]: I, you know, it wasn't like, you know, I didn't have a choice that I needed to do or not do
[Guest]: at that point in time.
[Guest]: It was a tough call.
[Guest]: You know, when I left for the US to work for Infosys, I had a, I think, three month old
[Guest]: daughter at that time.
[Guest]: So, yeah, it was a tough, tough time.
[Amit Varma]: And there must have been worries about safety as well.
[Amit Varma]: Like there's an interview of your wife, Sonal, where she talks about how, when you told her,
[Amit Varma]: you took her to this Chinese restaurant, and you told her that this is what I've done.
[Amit Varma]: And she had no idea at that point, that this is what has happened.
[Amit Varma]: I've become a whistleblower.
[Amit Varma]: And she talks about how, you know, she took a sip of the soup.
[Amit Varma]: And then you said, I have something to tell you.
[Amit Varma]: And when she next took a sip of the soup, it was cold, which kind of indicates what
[Amit Varma]: a shock it is to her also.
[Amit Varma]: And she speaks about how you gave her a phone number in the US embassy to call if there
[Amit Varma]: was ever any trouble, because you felt the Indian police wouldn't help you.
[Amit Varma]: And elsewhere in Iban's book, it's mentioned about how I think Debbie Robertson gave you
[Amit Varma]: the number that, you know, call the US embassy, because you're a US citizen, call the US embassy
[Amit Varma]: if there's a problem.
[Amit Varma]: And these fears had to be part of it, because it was basically the people who, you know,
[Amit Varma]: once Ranbaxy realized that dossier, that PowerPoint presentation was with the FDA, and they physically
[Amit Varma]: saw it in one of the meetings with the FDA, I would guess it's you and Dr. Kumar, who
[Amit Varma]: are the culprits and Dr. Kumar has sent a veiled warning that you will be implicated
[Amit Varma]: in this.
[Guest]: So you are a...
[Guest]: Smart man.
[Guest]: Both of us.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Unfortunately, you know what, it was a tough time.
[Guest]: I don't know what to tell you.
[Guest]: I mean, we had security guards outside our home, but no amount of security buys you peace
[Guest]: of mind, right?
[Guest]: You're always kind of worried about, you know, what's going to happen behind you.
[Guest]: She also went through a lot.
[Guest]: I mean, I'm...
[Guest]: What can I say?
[Amit Varma]: Are there times when you think, I wouldn't do this all over again?
[Amit Varma]: Or had you known what was going to unfold that you would have taken another path?
[Guest]: You know what, I was asked this question many times, and I don't think, I can't think of,
[Guest]: you know, whether I would do something different when it comes to what I did with the Ranbaxy
[Guest]: thing.
[Guest]: What I did in my personal life, yes, I mean, there's always regrets and there's a lot...
[Guest]: Because look, there's never an easy thing when you're dealing with people's lives, right?
[Guest]: You can always second guess yourself.
[Guest]: Could you have done things better?
[Guest]: Could you have done things differently?
[Guest]: Would you still have, you know, a family together if you had done that?
[Guest]: Those are valid questions.
[Guest]: I don't have answers to that.
[Guest]: But when it comes to what happened with Ranbaxy, there's really no choice.
[Guest]: I mean, how could you sort of, you know, say no to what was happening, knowing full well
[Guest]: that forget about what is happening in Africa.
[Guest]: I'm worried about what is happening here.
[Guest]: Go outside Mumbai, right?
[Guest]: Go outside, travel 40 kilometers outside of Mumbai where you don't have the Guardian Pharmacy,
[Guest]: the 98.4, and then see what is sold actually at a chemist shop or a pharmacy shop.
[Guest]: We have no systems in place.
[Guest]: You know, when I talk about recall and adverse events, people never paid attention.
[Guest]: You know what the pandemic did?
[Guest]: It made people realize that there is something called an adverse event.
[Guest]: You take a vaccine, you know, you will develop some issues around with it.
[Guest]: Some people will have rashes.
[Guest]: Some people will probably have a thrombolytic event, you know, that we have seen.
[Guest]: These people know that, you know what, there is something called an adverse event that
[Guest]: we have to record and report so that something can be done about it.
[Guest]: Until the pandemic came around, there was no awareness in the country around this issue.
[Guest]: How do you build that capability in the country, right?
[Guest]: I mean, there are written documents, you know, Indian companies saying that if they are forced
[Guest]: to recall a drug lot from the United States because it's a fair lot, they tell in writing
[Guest]: that we are going to redirect it to the Indian market.
[Guest]: How do you reconcile yourself with that?
[Guest]: If it's a fair lot in the US, it's a fair lot.
[Guest]: You don't redirect that to the Indian market and sell it and make money out of it.
[Guest]: There are companies that have made this representation to the US FDA because the law that requires
[Guest]: you to destroy that lot.
[Guest]: They don't want to destroy it.
[Guest]: They want to recall it and take it away from and distribute it in a market that doesn't
[Guest]: have the stringent regulations.
[Guest]: Knowing that, how can you not do what you're doing, right?
[Amit Varma]: There's a quote in the book, which is a variation on a famous quote about medicine that basically
[Amit Varma]: every medicine is a poison, but under certain very controlled circumstances, it can solve
[Amit Varma]: whatever medical problem you have.
[Amit Varma]: So therefore, that control is important.
[Amit Varma]: Controlling those conditions, what is the rate of release?
[Amit Varma]: What is the level of the dosage?
[Amit Varma]: Is it a pure formulation?
[Amit Varma]: Are there impurities, blah, blah, blah.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, the processes in manufacturing matter, like for certain sterile medicines
[Amit Varma]: which are made, if you're in a particular part of the factory, you're actually supposed
[Amit Varma]: to move very slowly so that the direction of the air doesn't change.
[Amit Varma]: These are the kind of processes that matter.
[Amit Varma]: And here you have people like just flouting it in crazy ways.
[Amit Varma]: Like there's another inspection that part of Iban's book focuses on this FDA investigator
[Amit Varma]: called Peter Baker, who, you know, for a series of years did a number of these inspections
[Amit Varma]: and became hated by the Indian pharma industry, because he always found what they didn't want
[Amit Varma]: him to find.
[Amit Varma]: And there's one factory he describes where the security guard was packing the medicines
[Amit Varma]: with his bare hands.
[Amit Varma]: This is a kind of bullshit that kind of went on.
[Amit Varma]: So all this starts in like 2007, 2008, whatever, around that period.
[Amit Varma]: And the case gets over in 2013.
[Amit Varma]: So it's like gone on for five years and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And at one level, it would seem that it's finally ended well, to the extent that these
[Amit Varma]: guys, Ranbaxy, agreed that they had committed all of that fraud, that they had fudged the
[Amit Varma]: data.
[Amit Varma]: They agreed to all of that.
[Amit Varma]: You know, a settlement was given, of which you got a chunk, your lawyers got a chunk,
[Amit Varma]: all of that happened.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, you know, one of the things that I found incredibly odd that this
[Amit Varma]: is around the time that, you know, Lipitor went generic, and Ranbaxy had applied to be
[Amit Varma]: first in line.
[Amit Varma]: And during the FDA, it became a big debate that we know that this is a fraudulent company.
[Amit Varma]: Do we give them the right to be first in line?
[Amit Varma]: And there were various incentives, which were marked towards ignoring that and allowing
[Amit Varma]: Ranbaxy, as eventually happened, they were allowed to manufacture that generic.
[Amit Varma]: And there were various incentives.
[Amit Varma]: Incentive number one is that, you know, US politics wanted it to happen because they
[Amit Varma]: needed generics to come in.
[Amit Varma]: Incentive number two is that the way the law was structured, if they don't give it to Ranbaxy,
[Amit Varma]: they can't give it to anyone else because Ranbaxy has that sole initial right of making
[Amit Varma]: the generic.
[Amit Varma]: So, it's all a big mess and eventually they gave it to Ranbaxy, but then the judgment
[Amit Varma]: comes.
[Amit Varma]: But then what strikes me about the judgment is that fine, it has happened, but fundamentally
[Amit Varma]: nothing has changed.
[Guest]: See, so, you know, as far as Ranbaxy is concerned, right, it was purely a monetary penalty.
[Guest]: They pled guilty to seven counts of criminal felony, paid a whole boatload of money.
[Guest]: It's essentially money that they earned from selling Lipitor, the one that came in the
[Guest]: left pocket, turned around and gave it back to the government.
[Amit Varma]: That's exactly what happened.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, one of the reasons that it was cited internally within the FDA is if we don't give
[Amit Varma]: them the right to give the generic, they won't be able to pay the settlement.
[Amit Varma]: That's just bizarre logic.
[Guest]: Bizarre logic.
[Guest]: It's very good.
[Guest]: You think about, you know, dysfunction in the systems, right?
[Guest]: This is purely dysfunction in the system.
[Guest]: And you're essentially incentivizing a criminal saying that, look, you know what, if you don't
[Guest]: do this deal, they're not going to be able to pay their penalty.
[Guest]: How perverse is that, right?
[Guest]: But unfortunately, you know what, bureaucracies and systems all over the world work the same
[Guest]: way, right?
[Guest]: But the sad part about this whole thing is that there is no individual accountability.
[Guest]: Company pled guilty, right?
[Guest]: Company actually, you know, admitted that, yes, you know, this is a statement of facts.
[Guest]: This is what we have done.
[Guest]: We shouldn't have done this.
[Guest]: You know, we violated these particular statutes and this is because, you know, because of
[Guest]: this we're pleading guilty and then we're agreeing to pay the penalty.
[Guest]: No individual accountability.
[Guest]: Now, people will argue saying that, oh, it's a jurisdiction issue.
[Guest]: It's a, you know, people overseas, we don't have jurisdiction.
[Guest]: I mean, if you have the will to overcome, you can certainly overcome.
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, you have the company selling stuff within your own country, right?
[Guest]: Your, you know, your drug supply is contaminated with this stuff.
[Guest]: If you want to make an example of it, you could have done that, but it requires will
[Guest]: to be able to do that.
[Guest]: And that particular time, because they didn't have, unfortunately, there was no personal
[Guest]: accountability for that.
[Guest]: Having said that, the one good thing that I know has happened is that the Office of
[Guest]: Inspector General did look at it carefully.
[Guest]: They changed a number of regulations governing overseas inspections.
[Guest]: They brought in a lot more transparency.
[Guest]: They figured out that, you know, while the Ranbaxy case was going on, they set up offices
[Guest]: here in Mumbai and in Delhi as well, which obviously never functioned the way they ought
[Guest]: to function.
[Guest]: But what I'm saying is that they at least try to address systematic failures within
[Guest]: their system.
[Guest]: I just wish that we had done the same thing too.
[Guest]: I just wish that in Delhi, we would have done the same thing.
[Guest]: We would have accepted the fact that, look, you know what, whatever has happened has happened,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: If you don't want to go back and look backward, that's fine, but at least let's look forward.
[Guest]: Let's try and make sure that this doesn't ever happen again.
[Guest]: Let's fix our systems and our processes and make sure that this kind of shenanigans never
[Guest]: happens.
[Amit Varma]: I don't think that has happened.
[Amit Varma]: Let's take a quick commercial break and then let's get back to talking about this because
[Amit Varma]: this might appear to be the end of a story.
[Amit Varma]: The hero goes on a quest, the hero wins, the villain is punished, but it's not the end
[Amit Varma]: of the story.
[Amit Varma]: It's not even close.
[Amit Varma]: So we'll come back after the break to discuss all of that.
[Amit Varma]: Have you always wanted to be a writer but never quite gotten down to it?
[Amit Varma]: Well, I'd love to help you.
[Amit Varma]: Over the last year, I've enjoyed teaching my online course, The Art of Clear Writing,
[Amit Varma]: and an online community has now sprung up of all my past students.
[Amit Varma]: We have workshops, a newsletter to showcase the work of students, and vibrant community
[Amit Varma]: interaction with much stimulation.
[Amit Varma]: In the course itself, through four webinars spread over four weekends, I share all I know
[Amit Varma]: about the craft and practice of clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: There are many exercises, much interaction, and a lovely and lively community at the end
[Amit Varma]: of it.
[Amit Varma]: The course costs rupees 10,000 plus GST, or about $150.
[Amit Varma]: And the October classes begin on the 9th of October.
[Amit Varma]: So if you're interested, head on over to register at IndiaUncut.com slash clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: That's IndiaUncut.com slash clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: Being a good writer does not require God-given talent, just the willingness to work hard
[Amit Varma]: and a clear idea of what you need to do to refine your skills.
[Amit Varma]: I can help you.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the Unseen, I'm chatting with Dinesh Thakur on his long journey
[Amit Varma]: not just about exposing the fraud at Ranbaxy, but a lot more than that, because what that
[Amit Varma]: fraud really uncovered was what are in a sense worst practices within the Indian industry
[Amit Varma]: itself and how that problem remains to be solved.
[Amit Varma]: Because that case happens, none of the individuals get punished, the company pays the fine, and
[Amit Varma]: then is bought by Sun Pharma.
[Amit Varma]: And Iban's book shows how even in the years to come, as Peter Baker, the FDA investigator
[Amit Varma]: does his inspections and all of that, you know, those those malpractices continue.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, you sent me a bunch of links, which are linked from the show notes about
[Amit Varma]: how even now, even up till the current day, companies are basically getting away with
[Amit Varma]: what they can get away with.
[Amit Varma]: That's a default approach.
[Amit Varma]: Even if the regulation gets a little better, so they get away with less, they're still
[Amit Varma]: getting away with most of what they're trying to get away with.
[Amit Varma]: And that kind of makes it problematic for us.
[Amit Varma]: So like, was there a point where after all this is over, after you know, that decision
[Amit Varma]: was announced?
[Amit Varma]: What was it like for you?
[Amit Varma]: Was there a moment of great relief that this crusade is over?
[Amit Varma]: Or was there this sense of like, okay, what now, they solved nothing, there's still work
[Amit Varma]: to be done?
[Guest]: Yeah, no, I mean, I think that, obviously, there was a sense of relief, because, you
[Guest]: know, clearly, you know, something that you're dealing with for eight long years, at least
[Guest]: sees a milestone of some kind, right?
[Guest]: So it was a, you know, huge sense of relief.
[Guest]: And you know, it was a chapter closed, you know, if you can say that way.
[Guest]: But I think what was also important was that, you know, what made me think back was this,
[Guest]: when the news broke, there was a lot of coverage here in India as well.
[Guest]: Because you know, this was, you know, newsworthy event, there was a lot of coverage.
[Guest]: And there was a lot of pushback from the sort of experts who kind of, you know, are aware
[Guest]: of what the industry is doing, saying that, you know, oh, this is a whole lot of, you
[Guest]: know, think about nothing, this is all about documentation problem.
[Guest]: It's just that, you know, this company did not document the way that, you know, was required
[Guest]: of the USFDA.
[Guest]: And that's the reason why they were fined.
[Guest]: If you go back and look at some of the coverage and some of the discussions that actually
[Guest]: happened in around that time in 2013, that was what it was, you know, so just sort of
[Guest]: distract as much as possible and not let it linger, right?
[Guest]: So the question actually came, you know, to me was, okay, fine, you know, if that's the
[Guest]: approach that you're taking, then the only way to rebut that is to collect data and present
[Guest]: it in a way that kind of, you know, provides a different narrative, the real reality of
[Guest]: what is really happening.
[Guest]: So with that in mind, you know, I was introduced to my current colleague on my board right
[Guest]: now, Prashant Reddy, who is intellectual property lawyer, but, you know, has deep knowledge
[Guest]: of the drug regulation, and the regulatory affairs.
[Guest]: So he and I have been working the last five, seven years right now, we essentially sort
[Guest]: of we set up a project to collect as much data as possible, to try and make our point,
[Guest]: because most of what was admitted by the company in the settlement agreement with the USFDA
[Guest]: was pertaining to the US market.
[Guest]: There was nothing in there about India, right?
[Guest]: So we spent almost two years, you know, filing RTIs, collecting data, building a case basically
[Guest]: saying that, look, the problem that we have is our drug regulation.
[Guest]: This regulation that was, you know, sort of established even before we became independent,
[Guest]: Drugs and Cosmetics Act, it really needs to be overhauled fundamentally, because there's
[Guest]: some systematic problems with that, like everything else in history, right?
[Guest]: The act is a reflection of what was prevailing at that point in time.
[Guest]: We had princely states, which essentially were, you know, asserting their independence
[Guest]: about what they needed to do.
[Guest]: Most of the issues we were dealing with at that point in time was with import of drugs,
[Guest]: because we didn't really make anything, right?
[Guest]: So the act at the center was written primarily to regulate imports, and they gave a free
[Guest]: hand to various states to do what they needed to do.
[Guest]: So over a period of time, this, you know, sort of, you know, disjointed system became
[Guest]: so cumbersome that right now that the statutory bodies that exist within this regulation,
[Guest]: their purpose is not to speak for public health.
[Guest]: They actually exist to try and throw hurdles in progress.
[Guest]: And the only way that you can, you know, address that is to make a fundamental change bottom
[Guest]: up to this regulation.
[Guest]: So we collected a whole bunch of data, developed a public interest litigation, went back to
[Guest]: the Supreme Court in 2016.
[Guest]: Sadly, the court didn't entertain our petition at that point in time.
[Guest]: So, you know, we continue to do what we need to do.
[Guest]: So we have a bunch of cases in various high courts.
[Guest]: We have one couple of them in Delhi High Court, we have in Karnataka High Court.
[Guest]: Because you know, unless the regulation changes, right, and the regulatory structure changes,
[Guest]: it's going to be very hard for us to think about, you know, the quality of medicine in
[Guest]: the country.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: I think that we are so used to this fact that, you know, we accept the quality that is given
[Guest]: to us without questioning.
[Guest]: And we have no data to understand what the long term impact of this is.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: I mean, today, people are put on anti-hypertensives, and they take it for years on end.
[Guest]: We have no data to actually understand what is a long term consequence of taking poor
[Guest]: quality anti-hypertensives.
[Guest]: What really happens to people?
[Guest]: We just don't know.
[Guest]: I can say that they're bad for you.
[Guest]: Somebody else will come and say, no, how do you know it's bad for you?
[Guest]: We have no data.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: So unless we have real good scientific data, it is going to be very hard to make an argument
[Guest]: that look, you know, we need to make some fundamental changes in the way medicine is
[Guest]: practiced in the country.
[Guest]: And so that's what we do.
[Guest]: I mean, even today, you know, most of our efforts are essentially geared toward try
[Guest]: and collecting information to build a case that we really need to look at this area.
[Guest]: And you know, I've said this in other places as well, you know, public health in India
[Guest]: is not about access to qualified doctors.
[Guest]: We just don't have enough doctors.
[Guest]: I mean, yeah, I mean, in Mumbai, you do in Delhi, you know, in Gurgaon, we do, but go
[Guest]: to Western Europe, go to Bihar, you know, go to any Jharkhand, go to Chhattisgarh.
[Guest]: Our first line of defense is somebody falls sick, they walk up the stairs of the chemist
[Guest]: shop and says, can you give me some medicine to make this thing go away?
[Guest]: That is our first line of defense.
[Guest]: That's our public health right now.
[Guest]: We have poor ASHA workers who don't even, not even employees, we pay them an honorarium
[Guest]: of 2500 rupees a month.
[Guest]: And we ask them to inoculate in newborns and give vaccines.
[Guest]: That is the extent of our public health.
[Guest]: We've seen what has happened in the pandemic, right?
[Guest]: We've seen what the consequence of our poor investment in public health has been.
[Guest]: So we really need to think holistically about what does it mean, you know, in terms of access
[Guest]: to medicine and be honest with ourselves.
[Guest]: Okay, are we okay with this?
[Guest]: Are we okay with an industry that essentially is taking us for a ride?
[Guest]: Are we okay?
[Guest]: Because you know, we have the ability to buy imported medicine or, you know, we can go
[Guest]: get ourselves treated in Singapore and get a tooth extracted or go to Mount Sinai to
[Guest]: get our cancer treated.
[Guest]: Is that okay for the rest of the country?
[Guest]: And that is a question I think nobody can answer but yourself.
[Guest]: At the end of the day, you have to answer it for yourself.
[Amit Varma]: So a couple of questions, but before that, an observation, you mentioned sort of long
[Amit Varma]: term effects of say, taking antihypertensive medicine.
[Amit Varma]: But I think a point that is worth underscoring for the listeners is that there is a seen
[Amit Varma]: and the unseen effect to bad medicine getting out there as well or medicines made in this
[Amit Varma]: way getting out there as well.
[Amit Varma]: And the obvious and seen effect, though this is unseen, but at least it's easy to think
[Amit Varma]: of conceptually, that if a medicine isn't made properly, it can number one, not treat
[Amit Varma]: the patient in the way that it should.
[Amit Varma]: And number two, it can have an adverse side effect and it can, you know, kill the patient.
[Amit Varma]: But what it can also do is over a period of time, if you have substandard medicines going
[Amit Varma]: around, then pathogens gain a chance to actually evolve and mutate and become much worse.
[Amit Varma]: And also, what happens is that doctors who are used to generics, not acting properly
[Amit Varma]: might tend to over prescribe them to compensate for that.
[Amit Varma]: And then that can, for example, create antibiotic resistance, you know, which also becomes a
[Amit Varma]: greater problem later down this line.
[Guest]: Have I have I stated that correctly?
[Guest]: I mean, we see that, you know, because remember, tuberculosis is still endemic to us, right?
[Guest]: This is not a disease for wealthy nations.
[Guest]: This is a disease for us, for, you know, poor countries like us.
[Guest]: And look at how tuberculosis is mutated.
[Guest]: You know, we had an original strain of the bacteria, the pathogen that actually created
[Guest]: tuberculosis, right?
[Guest]: And then now we have multi-drug resistant tuberculosis.
[Guest]: It doesn't respond to the standard care that we used to actually have.
[Guest]: And we've gotten to a point right now where we are using super potent, you know, class
[Guest]: of drugs called carbapenems, because none of our standard of care antibiotics actually
[Guest]: work to treat multi-drug resistant tuberculosis.
[Guest]: What is going to happen if they become resistant to that, you know, in the 10 years from now?
[Amit Varma]: And you've pointed out that there's a similar trajectory to malaria and dengue and all else
[Guest]: well.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: So here's my first question to you that before talking about the work that you do in trying
[Amit Varma]: to get the regulation up to scratch, if I ask you to define what is wrong with the Indian
[Amit Varma]: pharma industry today, like we've discussed what Ranbaxy did wrong, right?
[Amit Varma]: Now what you've pointed out and what Iban's book points out is that those were, at least
[Amit Varma]: at the time, endemic within the Indian industry in general.
[Amit Varma]: She's mentioned companies like Wachard and Dr. Reddy's and so on, and various other companies.
[Amit Varma]: Those were endemic then.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, I read out that passage of how so much data was invented, falsified.
[Amit Varma]: There is even this amusing story of when someone in your team was talking processes and they
[Amit Varma]: said that we'll build a software which gathers together data like this.
[Amit Varma]: One alarmed person listening to that turned to his boss and said, but how will we backdate
[Amit Varma]: documents?
[Amit Varma]: And I found that hilarious.
[Amit Varma]: Has that culture changed or does that culture still exist?
[Amit Varma]: Is data still being falsified?
[Amit Varma]: Is a lot of the medicine that we are getting in India still substandard and unreliable?
[Guest]: So Amit, again, you know, I cannot make a blanket statement, right?
[Guest]: Because I have to back up whatever I say with real examples.
[Guest]: I mean, if I make a statement without that, then the industry will come after me, which
[Guest]: is fine.
[Guest]: But I think it's important to back up whatever you say with data.
[Guest]: The same industry that makes medicines for Indians makes medicine that actually sells
[Guest]: in the United States, right?
[Guest]: It complies with their regulation.
[Guest]: It makes sure that, you know, when the U.S. FD inspectors come in, yes, I mean, there
[Guest]: are problems, but they're fixing them.
[Guest]: They're training their people better.
[Guest]: They're trying to make sure that their equipment is of the standard quality.
[Guest]: They're making sure that they're cleaning, you know, between making batches of different
[Guest]: products so that, you know, you don't have cross-contamination.
[Guest]: They're doing all of this right now, but they're doing it for the export market.
[Guest]: A few hundred yards away from that factory is another factory that makes medicine for
[Guest]: Indian market.
[Guest]: They don't even use distilled water.
[Guest]: They use tap water to mix the chemicals in order to, you know, create the product and
[Guest]: punch tablets in it.
[Guest]: And you know the quality of the water, the general water that we have right now, the
[Guest]: microbial contamination that we see.
[Guest]: Why does this happen, right?
[Guest]: I mean, why is it that even as late as last year, we had documented cases where the U.S.
[Guest]: FDA puts out an inspection report saying, we found when we came to inspect your facilities
[Guest]: that your people were shredding documents.
[Guest]: Why do you do that?
[Guest]: If you're doing everything by the book, why are you shredding documents?
[Guest]: As late as last week, on 16th of September, the U.S. FDA has now for two contract research
[Guest]: organizations, once in Mumbai and once in Ahmedabad, they've essentially revoked all
[Guest]: approvals gotten from these two contract research organizations because they do not have confidence
[Guest]: in the clinical data that they are supplied.
[Guest]: Why does that happen?
[Guest]: Ranbaxy was 2013, right?
[Guest]: We are in 2021.
[Guest]: It's eight years now.
[Guest]: Why do we still have to deal with the Wimta Labs, which was the genesis of the Ranbaxy
[Guest]: situation, a contract lab that was fabricating data?
[Guest]: It is happening right now.
[Guest]: Last week, the U.S. FDA revoked licenses for two different CROs, once in Mumbai and once
[Guest]: in Ahmedabad.
[Guest]: So, it clearly is happening because there's something going really wrong, right?
[Guest]: Otherwise, why would they do that?
[Guest]: Now, I am yet to find a single instance of a publicly reported inspection report done
[Guest]: by our regulator that says that we found that documents were being shredded, that patient
[Guest]: data was being fabricated.
[Guest]: Now, I can interpret it one of two ways.
[Guest]: I can say, well, never happens, right?
[Guest]: For India, they follow the book.
[Guest]: Everything happens great.
[Guest]: Just my experience tells me that's not the case.
[Guest]: So the question that I have to ask myself is that why is it that our regulator cannot
[Guest]: find these kind of violations that the U.S. FDA finds, that the European Union regulator
[Amit Varma]: finds, the French inspector finds?
[Amit Varma]: What's the answer to that?
[Guest]: We're just not incentivized properly.
[Guest]: How do we change that?
[Guest]: First of all, I think that the governing law, the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, was written for
[Guest]: the 1940s.
[Guest]: It was written when we had a very limited number of drugs and actually lists out the
[Guest]: number of drugs in the appendix of that law, right?
[Guest]: And the kind of diseases we were treating them were essentially infectious diseases,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: We were dealing with typhoid, we were dealing with cholera, we were dealing with malaria
[Guest]: at that point in time.
[Guest]: Look at the prevalence of diseases today.
[Guest]: Majority of the diseases that we are dealing with right now are lifestyle diseases.
[Guest]: Diabetes, we are the diabetic capital of the world.
[Guest]: Hypertension, you know, oncology, cancer-related diseases, right?
[Guest]: So what I'm saying to you is that the premise of the reason why the law was framed has changed
[Guest]: completely.
[Guest]: Science has changed.
[Guest]: We have never caught up with it.
[Guest]: We have never caught up with the situation, right?
[Guest]: It's not like every drug they make is a bad drug.
[Guest]: It's not.
[Guest]: Many drugs that are manufactured by Indian pharma companies for the Indian market, because
[Guest]: the way physiology works are just fine.
[Guest]: You take an antibiotic, if you have the right dosage, right?
[Guest]: I'm telling you, if you have the right dosage, that's the biggest issue that we have here.
[Guest]: We just don't know what the dosage is.
[Guest]: The antibiotics just work just fine.
[Guest]: So if you have an infection, the antibiotic kills something, you know, the pathogen that's
[Guest]: causing the infectious diseases in you.
[Guest]: Problem is that if you have anything to do with, you know, psychiatry, anything to do
[Guest]: with mental health, anything to do with hormonal, you know, treatment, like if you have a thyroid
[Guest]: medication that you're taking, anything to do with, you know, you're in the hospital
[Guest]: and you have an autoimmune disease like lupus, or if you've undergone some kind of organ
[Guest]: transplant surgery, these drugs act in a very narrow band.
[Guest]: You really have to get the right dosage.
[Guest]: And if you don't have control over the right dosage, unlike antibiotics, we see large and
[Guest]: disproportionate side effects, which our systems are not capable of catching right now.
[Guest]: So if you don't catch those, if you don't report those, then how can I make an argument
[Guest]: that things are not working?
[Amit Varma]: Let's double click on the bit about how our regulations were designed in 1940, when the
[Amit Varma]: Act basically came about, how would you change them today?
[Guest]: So there are a couple of different things that we have to look at in multiple layers,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Remember, at the time the regulation was framed, health according to Indian constitution is
[Guest]: a state subject.
[Guest]: We have heard this many, many times right now during the pandemic, any time you talk
[Guest]: about central government's response, the response is health is a state subject, go talk to your
[Guest]: state, right?
[Guest]: What has happened is that parliament delegated responsibility for drug regulation to the
[Guest]: central government.
[Guest]: Central government turned around and delegated back to the states.
[Guest]: Now, you cannot, I mean, legally, an authority that's given to you without the explicit permission
[Guest]: of the government, of the parliament, you cannot sub delegate.
[Guest]: That's a major issue.
[Guest]: This was an issue that we were going to contend in the court, unfortunately, didn't go down
[Guest]: that way, number one.
[Guest]: Number two, most of the drugs that are manufactured in the various states are governed by state
[Guest]: drug regulators.
[Guest]: What happens is that these state drug states actually derive manufacturing license revenue
[Guest]: from these states.
[Guest]: So why does most of our drug actually gets manufactured in Himachal Pradesh in Baddi?
[Guest]: Or why does most of our API gets manufactured in Hyderabad?
[Guest]: It's because we have specific tax incentives that we've enabled these companies to set
[Guest]: up this special economic zones, where they go ahead and manufacture their medicines.
[Guest]: Now, here is the big issue with us, right?
[Guest]: Because state, healthiest state subject, a drug regulator in Karnataka, right, who finds
[Guest]: out or Maharashtra, who finds out there is a specific batch made by a specific company,
[Guest]: which is located in Himachal Pradesh, has a product that is not a standard quality,
[Guest]: which is what we call adulterated drugs in our parlance here.
[Guest]: What does that person do?
[Guest]: There is no jurisdiction for any drug regulator in Maharashtra to go and enforce it.
[Amit Varma]: And this is not hypothetical, this has actually happened here.
[Guest]: This is happening right now.
[Guest]: The drug regulator in Maharashtra will find and flag drugs that are not a standard quality.
[Guest]: But beyond flagging those is nothing.
[Guest]: The drug regulator in Maharashtra has no jurisdictional control over what is happening in Himachal
[Guest]: Pradesh.
[Guest]: So, what he can do or she can do is write a letter to the Himachal Pradesh drug controller
[Guest]: and say, we found this batch that is not of standard quality.
[Guest]: And that person will, once they get the letter, crumple it and throw it in the basket.
[Guest]: Because for them, the revenue from the licensing is more important.
[Guest]: Incentive there is about generating revenue from the licensing authorities of the manufacturing
[Guest]: facilities.
[Guest]: Now, did we imagine this, you know, when we wrote that?
[Guest]: Obviously not, right?
[Guest]: Things have changed.
[Guest]: Another simple example, right?
[Guest]: How we think about quality, right?
[Guest]: Quality in the rest of the world is thought about as a part of the process.
[Guest]: So you build quality by design.
[Guest]: That is our concept of how we think about quality.
[Guest]: Every step has a measure that you measure quality.
[Guest]: The way that we think about quality in India is the final product.
[Guest]: We don't care about how you manufacture it.
[Guest]: The way that we think about quality is that every state in the union actually has a state
[Guest]: drug regulatory authority who has a budget.
[Guest]: And it's a pittance, you know, we've kind of done RTI work on this, it's a pittance.
[Guest]: That budget is given to the state drug regulators and say, you go and buy medicines from retail
[Guest]: outlets.
[Guest]: And then that samples are then sent to the state drug labs who then analyze that.
[Guest]: They tell you which of a standard quality or not.
[Guest]: Our definition of quality is the end product.
[Guest]: That's not the process by which.
[Guest]: Why is this important?
[Guest]: The reason it's important is because initial quality and the quality before the drug product
[Guest]: expires is very different.
[Guest]: Think about when you buy a car, J.D. Power Associates actually measures the quality of
[Guest]: what they do, say initial quality, not after you've ridden the car around 200 miles and
[Guest]: then come back and check the quality of the car.
[Guest]: There's a difference between those two, right?
[Guest]: Initial quality is very different than what is on the market.
[Guest]: Now, when the inspector goes out there and actually sort of buys the product, do you
[Guest]: know that you're getting a batch that has recently come into the market?
[Guest]: Do you know that the batch has been sitting out there for the market for two years right
[Guest]: now?
[Guest]: There's no idea.
[Guest]: Number one.
[Guest]: Number two, this is the biggest issue that we have in the country.
[Guest]: When we adjudicate something as not of standard quality, we only look at the active ingredient.
[Guest]: And I'll tell you why this is really important, right?
[Guest]: So when you think about drug quality, when you make a formulation, when you make a tablet,
[Guest]: a capsule, a liquid, whatever that you want to make, right, the chemical, the biological
[Guest]: that are actually in there that is active, that treats the ailment that you have is only
[Guest]: one part of it.
[Guest]: There are other things in there that are fillers, right?
[Guest]: For example, how do you take powder and make it look like a capsule?
[Guest]: You have to put some binder in it, right?
[Guest]: And then you put a lot of pressure in it to make it look like a tablet.
[Guest]: How do you take a bitter tasting chemical and make a syrup out of it and make sure the
[Guest]: kids actually drink it?
[Guest]: Because you add sugar in it, you add sucrose in it, you add some flavoring in it.
[Guest]: These are all protocol excipients.
[Guest]: Our testing protocol, as written in the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, only looks at the active
[Guest]: ingredient.
[Guest]: It does not look at the excipients and what really happens to them.
[Guest]: Why is this important?
[Guest]: The reason it's important, and this has been very recent, is that there's a class of drugs
[Guest]: called Sartans.
[Guest]: These are essentially prescribed for cardiovascular diseases.
[Guest]: It has been found that many of the Sartans actually have a small carcinogenic impurity
[Guest]: called NDMA.
[Guest]: It's been written up, recently it's been written up as well.
[Guest]: If you're not looking for impurities to begin with, how the heck are you going to find this?
[Guest]: You're only measuring for what is the active ingredient.
[Guest]: When we adjudicate our drug quality in terms of what we consider good quality drugs, we
[Guest]: don't even consider impurities.
[Guest]: So there are systematic issues of this nature which really have to be thought through.
[Guest]: So when the rest of the world looks at impurities, they look at related substances, they say,
[Guest]: look, you know, if you have this impurity over a certain threshold, it becomes not of
[Guest]: standard quality.
[Guest]: We don't do that because it's not written in our law.
[Guest]: So I mean, I'm just giving you certain examples here.
[Guest]: We really need to take a step back.
[Guest]: We really need to do this and think very carefully about what is it that we want our drug quality
[Guest]: system to be.
[Guest]: Because, you know, as a country, we only talk about what the central government spends in
[Guest]: terms of health, right?
[Guest]: We have some number, 2%, 3%.
[Guest]: We never account for what our out-of-pocket expenses are.
[Guest]: There is no accounting for that.
[Guest]: And you know, health care is primarily paid out-of-pocket in the country today.
[Guest]: We spend a lot of money on health care.
[Guest]: Look at the quarterly earnings of all the pharma companies, you'll know exactly what
[Amit Varma]: I'm talking about.
[Amit Varma]: So here's the thing.
[Amit Varma]: We take that step back.
[Amit Varma]: I can see that, okay, number one, what needs to be done is that you can't just say it's
[Amit Varma]: a state subject.
[Amit Varma]: You need a central regulatory authority which can then, you know, regulate the entire country.
[Amit Varma]: So if in Maharashtra you find out that some medicine manufactured in Himachal is a problem,
[Amit Varma]: you can fix it.
[Amit Varma]: That's number one.
[Amit Varma]: Number two, you need to modernize the laws beyond 1943.
[Amit Varma]: For example, you're not just looking at active ingredients, you're looking at expeciency.
[Guest]: Expeciency.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Impurities.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: You're looking at all of that.
[Amit Varma]: Let's say you modernize them in every way.
[Amit Varma]: You just gave one example.
[Amit Varma]: You'll still run into what I will take inspiration from you and call the Toyota Corolla problem,
[Amit Varma]: where you have described that back in the 2000s when you were at Ranbaxy, there was
[Amit Varma]: some drug which went to CDSCO, which is the Indian version of the FDA for approval, and
[Amit Varma]: the Toyota Corolla, a new version of the Toyota Corolla had just come out, and basically those
[Amit Varma]: guys were going to pass it if that Toyota Corolla was given to them.
[Amit Varma]: Now, this is regulation in India.
[Amit Varma]: It is as cultural and essential a part of Indian regulation and Indian law that all
[Amit Varma]: regulation and law essentially, the purpose of it is not to control some desirable social
[Amit Varma]: outcome, but for all practical purposes, it's rent-seeking.
[Amit Varma]: So how would you get past the Toyota Corolla problem?
[Amit Varma]: Because it seems to me at a deeper level, and we can, of course, go to the root causes
[Amit Varma]: of that as well.
[Amit Varma]: But at some level, it's a cultural problem at two levels.
[Amit Varma]: One is it's a cultural problem within companies, within individuals, within society of this
[Amit Varma]: jugaru mindset that I have to comply with X regulation.
[Amit Varma]: Let me figure out how to game that, irrespective of what the purpose of that regulation might
[Amit Varma]: be, and the other on the part of those who govern us is this rent-seeking mindset that
[Amit Varma]: I have power over people.
[Amit Varma]: How can I use that power for personal profit?
[Guest]: And when you put these two together, you know, it is a conundrum.
[Guest]: There's no question about it.
[Guest]: The only way that I have thought about this is you try and make the process as transparent
[Guest]: as possible.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: So let me give you a simple example, when Covaxin was approved, right, the CDSCO had
[Guest]: a subject expert committee, which looked at the data and said, you can give it emergency
[Guest]: authorization, right?
[Guest]: Same situation happened in the US.
[Guest]: The US FDA gave emergency authorization to the Pfizer and Moderna vaccine.
[Guest]: Two examples.
[Guest]: On one hand, the US FDA basically said, here is a list of experts that we are getting.
[Guest]: We are going to do an open meeting, live streaming.
[Guest]: You can dial in, listen to everybody, what questions they ask.
[Guest]: You may agree, disagree, but it's a completely transparent process at the end of which they
[Guest]: will vote.
[Guest]: And they will make a recommendation to the US FDA, what they should do with this particular,
[Guest]: you know, vaccine candidate that Pfizer has given us.
[Guest]: In our case, not only did we not know who the members of the committee was, we have
[Guest]: no idea what the deliberations were.
[Guest]: The outcome that was put out is basically like a two-sentence thing.
[Guest]: It is so opaque.
[Guest]: Now, why is this a state secret?
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: Malini Ayesola, who works for ADAN, she had to fight arm, you know, basically in Siddharthan,
[Guest]: they had to fight and to try and get names of people who were actually a member of that
[Guest]: subject expert committee, took them two months to try and get their names.
[Guest]: Okay, tell me, why is that a state secret?
[Guest]: Shouldn't the people in the country know who are these experts and, you know, they're actually
[Guest]: making a decision that impacts the rest of the country?
[Guest]: What data is it that they're looking at?
[Guest]: US FDA put the portfolio out there and basically said, here are the patients who are enrolled.
[Guest]: This is how long the study went for.
[Guest]: This is what we saw in the clinic.
[Guest]: We still do not have a published paper on Covaxin.
[Guest]: We have preprints.
[Guest]: Now, after, you know, nine months, we have preprints.
[Guest]: The point I'm trying to make to you is that transparency, I think, is one big thing that
[Guest]: we need to do.
[Guest]: Accountability comes in when you make things transparent, right?
[Guest]: Build it in the regulation that, you know, when you establish an advisory committee,
[Guest]: the membership of the committee, the documents that they review, their deliberations and
[Guest]: the outcome, whatever recommendation they make, put it on the web within a reasonable
[Guest]: time, day, two days, whatever it takes, you know, for you to be able to do that.
[Guest]: Let people have at it, right?
[Guest]: Why is that a state secret?
[Guest]: Bring transparency into the process.
[Guest]: I will tell you, like, you know, one of the things that we did, the Parliamentary Standing
[Guest]: Committee in 2013 had identified a set of four different drugs, you know, that they
[Guest]: found there was some hanky-panky going on there and was written in the Parliamentary
[Guest]: Standing Committee report.
[Guest]: And one of those drugs is a drug called buclizine, okay?
[Guest]: In India, it's marketed for as an appetite stimulant for children.
[Guest]: There is zero data for this, zero, none.
[Guest]: So we essentially sort of, you know, followed through with the drug regulator to tell us,
[Guest]: you know, on what basis did you approve this?
[Guest]: Never did, okay?
[Guest]: They never gave us answers.
[Guest]: So we had to go through the RTI process, the Appellate process, the Chief Information Commission
[Guest]: process.
[Guest]: You see, the day before the CIC hearing at 7 o'clock p.m. at night, Prashant gets an unsigned copy
[Guest]: of that report that names three former DCGIs by name saying they're the ones who essentially,
[Guest]: you know, sort of committed fraud.
[Guest]: It's still not signed.
[Guest]: And we still don't have the actual sort of the deliberations of what the interviews were
[Guest]: done by the Mahapatra Committee report.
[Guest]: We are litigating in the Delhi High Court right now.
[Guest]: Why this lack of transparency?
[Guest]: If you're following science, if you're doing your job, make it transparent, yeah?
[Guest]: That drug does not have, it is sold to children as an appetite stimulant, has zero data for
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: 15 crores annual turnover for that drug in India today.
[Guest]: It's been two years in Delhi High Court, we are litigating this.
[Guest]: So Mahapatra Committee was established by Dr. Harshvardhan, was one of the good things
[Guest]: that he did.
[Guest]: After the Parliamentary Standing Committee report came out, he instituted a committee
[Guest]: under the leadership of Dr. Mahapatra.
[Guest]: He did the investigation and he made a report.
[Guest]: They sat on that report for years and they strung us along for years.
[Guest]: And finally, you know, after going through multiple levels, CIC level, the day before
[Guest]: they give us a report, unsigned report, and they don't tell us who all they interviewed.
[Guest]: You want to know?
[Guest]: Why is that a state secret?
[Guest]: If a company is selling 15 crores worth of stuff to children without any clinical data
[Guest]: showed the drug actually works, don't people in this country have a right to know why they're
[Guest]: doing this?
[Guest]: Transparency is really important.
[Guest]: We need to bring in, you know, transparency into the process, into the system, so that
[Guest]: people can be held accountable.
[Guest]: At the end of the day, you know, the CDSCO or the directors there ultimately work for
[Guest]: people of India.
[Guest]: If they're making decisions that, you know, they're not in the interest of the people
[Guest]: of India, people of India need to know that, right?
[Amit Varma]: Why hide this kind of stuff?
[Amit Varma]: It just strikes me thinking aloud that maybe one of the things that this needs, it might
[Amit Varma]: even be an inapt sort of comparison to draw, but it just came to mind that maybe the drug
[Amit Varma]: industry needs this Nirbhaya moment, where you need a particular case that you can focus
[Amit Varma]: on and that case can evoke horror and empathy from people all over the place, and then change
[Amit Varma]: can happen.
[Amit Varma]: And that almost sounds like a horrible thing to say, because you're all, because I'm sure
[Amit Varma]: that there are bad things that happen because of this, not just with this one drug, but
[Amit Varma]: so many other drugs, you know, is it then an attribution problem, let's say, there's
[Amit Varma]: a side effect, someone dies, but you can't attribute it so easily to the medicine, because
[Amit Varma]: the medicine as it should work would never have caused that side effect.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, that all of this kind of goes unseen.
[Guest]: I mean, I wish, I wish what you had said was true.
[Guest]: I'll tell you another anecdote.
[Guest]: Earlier this year in January, 12 children in Jammu, who consumed cough syrup, succumbed.
[Guest]: It was causally linked to this cough syrup made by this company called Digital Vision
[Guest]: based in Himachal.
[Guest]: They had mistakenly substituted ethylene glycol for diethylene glycol.
[Guest]: One is an excipient, the other one is antifreeze.
[Guest]: Investigation was done by PGIMER in Chandigarh, qualified people, we're litigating in court
[Guest]: right now.
[Guest]: This is the fourth instance in India, fourth.
[Amit Varma]: So, where's the outrage, where are the people writing about it?
[Amit Varma]: Like it's…
[Guest]: Prabha has written.
[Guest]: The Indian Express, Prabha has written extensively about this, Priyanka has written.
[Guest]: The point here is that we don't care until it hits home, until it hits, it happens to
[Guest]: me and my family, there is no outrage.
[Guest]: Those 12 children were essentially children of people, of laborers who live below the
[Guest]: poverty line.
[Guest]: God forbid, if it happened to somebody who was, you know, in Delhi, in one of the posh
[Guest]: colonies, a defense colony and our friends colony, you would have seen the outrage.
[Guest]: It happened to these 12 young kids, whose parents were laborers in Jammu.
[Guest]: And it's been written, I mean, Priyanka is writing about it, you know, Anu has written
[Guest]: about it, Prabha has written about it in Indian Express, you did multiple stories on it.
[Guest]: This is something that we think, okay, it's not me who's affected, somebody else is affected.
[Guest]: This is not the first instance, fourth instance in India.
[Guest]: Lenton Commission report, this happened in Mumbai.
[Guest]: We had ethylene glycol poisoning in Mumbai in the 1950s.
[Guest]: Just as Lenton actually held an open inquiry, open inquiry here and made recommendations
[Guest]: that now we need to fix it.
[Guest]: Same stuff happens in Chennai.
[Guest]: And now happens in Jammu.
[Guest]: And happens in Haryana 10 years ago.
[Amit Varma]: Why?
[Amit Varma]: I have to confess, I missed all these reports.
[Amit Varma]: So in any of these cases where a causal link has been found, where there's clear malpractice,
[Guest]: has anything actually ever come out of it?
[Guest]: In cases where, so first of all, our legal justice system is such that, you know, things
[Amit Varma]: drag on forever.
[Amit Varma]: Nothing goes anywhere.
[Guest]: There have been cases when they actually have proven, drug inspectors have proven a causal
[Guest]: link with something bad that has happened.
[Guest]: The outcome has been, and I'm not kidding you, these are actual judgments of Indian
[Guest]: courts.
[Guest]: The punishment was, stand in the court until the court rises.
[Amit Varma]: So this is the kindergarten judgment that just keeps standing till the court rises and
[Amit Varma]: then go and that's it.
[Amit Varma]: That's it.
[Amit Varma]: People have died and that's it.
[Guest]: Argument was an elderly person, he didn't know what he was doing.
[Guest]: Our IPC has so many holes.
[Guest]: I don't even know where to begin.
[Guest]: I've seen judgments that basically after great effort, some drug inspector has gone through
[Guest]: the, persisted through the entire process, proven that there was malefied intention and
[Guest]: negligence on the part of the manufacturer.
[Guest]: Guess what the judgment is?
[Guest]: The judgment is, stand until the rising of the court.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, this is even worse than what I expected because I thought that what you'd probably
[Amit Varma]: get is that even in that rare case, where a company is actually punished, there's no
[Amit Varma]: systemic change.
[Amit Varma]: Some company somewhere is punished, maybe some individual somewhere, there's no systemic
[Amit Varma]: change.
[Amit Varma]: This of course is even worse.
[Amit Varma]: They aren't even punished.
[Amit Varma]: They're made to stand in court.
[Guest]: But I mean, what message are we sending?
[Guest]: I mean, there are guidelines that are written that the CDSCO has issued that basically says
[Guest]: it actually advises the court that if you in case adjudicate that there was a problem,
[Guest]: there's something really bad that the manufacturer did, don't impose too harsh a penalty.
[Guest]: This was written by the regulators quite like, but kidding you.
[Guest]: And they stand and the judges read them and take that into consideration when imposing
[Guest]: penalties and sentencing.
[Guest]: How do I justify this?
[Guest]: Mental Commission Mumbai, seven people died here, Chennai, we had like 12 or 13 people
[Guest]: died.
[Guest]: Haryana and Jinn, they had the same situation.
[Guest]: How is it possible that we continue to mistake an excipient for anti-freeze?
[Guest]: I don't get this.
[Guest]: And there is no accountability, none.
[Amit Varma]: This puts into perspective the kind of environment that you're trying to function in, that you're
[Amit Varma]: trying to reform.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a bit about what you've been doing the last few years, since that judgment to
[Guest]: make things happen.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So, I mean, the only thing that we can do is collect data, right?
[Guest]: And argue.
[Guest]: So, we are in Delhi High Court arguing about transparency, we are in Karnataka High Court
[Guest]: arguing about bucleusin and this entire situation around that.
[Guest]: The other thing which is really important, which I think is really important, is that
[Guest]: we need to now create an environment where I'm not the only person saying this.
[Guest]: We need the academia to start paying attention to this.
[Guest]: We need other activists who are invested in public health to start saying this.
[Guest]: This has been the biggest disappointment for me over the last three or four years.
[Guest]: I just don't find aptitude within our academia here in India to actually do real research.
[Guest]: I just don't find that.
[Guest]: I'm sorry to say.
[Guest]: So, you know, as a part of the foundation, we try and look for people to give grants
[Guest]: to study public health-related issues.
[Guest]: It's extremely hard to find people who want to actually do real work, okay?
[Guest]: I mean, in the academia, you find professors and say, okay, we'll give you a grant, please
[Guest]: study this area.
[Guest]: I'll give you a very simple example.
[Guest]: There are tons of studies about effectiveness of the ASHA program, which is essentially
[Guest]: the basis of our public health in the country, in rural India, because, you know, vaccinations
[Guest]: are run by them, maternal health is run by them.
[Guest]: There are lots and lots of studies.
[Guest]: There isn't a single study so far of how we deliver public health in urban areas.
[Guest]: Why is this important?
[Guest]: Migration is actually making people move from rural areas to cities like Mumbai, right?
[Guest]: We have a couple of different models.
[Guest]: We have a Mohalla Clinic model in Delhi.
[Guest]: We have a good model here, and BMC actually runs a reasonably good model.
[Guest]: There is zero academic studies evaluating the effectiveness of this program.
[Guest]: Isn't this important?
[Guest]: As a country, should we not pay attention to why, you know, maybe these are great programs,
[Guest]: maybe they're doing very well.
[Guest]: If that is the case, let's replicate them.
[Guest]: Let's copy what these guys are doing and put them in all the other cities in the country,
[Guest]: because it's not just Mumbai that has a migration problem, every city in India has a migration
[Guest]: problem, right?
[Guest]: And if the model that BMC is running is so great, let's take that model, lift it and
[Guest]: put it in their cities and tell them, guys, if you do it this way, you get better outcomes.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: No, shouldn't we study that?
[Guest]: Not a single study.
[Guest]: Why is that?
[Guest]: I can also say that, look, the problem is funding is also an issue here.
[Guest]: Getting government to fund these kinds of studies is next to impossible.
[Guest]: The funding process is so mired in approvals and bureaucracy that you just sit, wait, apply
[Guest]: for a grant and wait for years for the government to be able to fund something like this.
[Guest]: But then, you know, we have to change our mind or change our perspective, right?
[Guest]: The government says, you know, we're going to take two years to evaluate a proposal.
[Guest]: Don't make it hard for private funders to fund it.
[Amit Varma]: Is it hard for private funders to fund it?
[Amit Varma]: Extremely hard.
[Guest]: Because of restrictions on foreign capital?
[Guest]: Foreign funding, right?
[Guest]: I mean, there is an organization here in Mumbai that we wanted to support, we wanted to give
[Guest]: a grant to, to study the BMC model.
[Guest]: It's been eight months they're waiting for HMSE approval from the health ministry to
[Amit Varma]: start the funding.
[Unknown]: And why isn't the approval coming?
[Amit Varma]: Who knows?
[Amit Varma]: So they won't solve the problem, they won't let you solve the problem.
[Guest]: What do you do now?
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: Fine.
[Guest]: You know, you don't have the means to be able to do it.
[Guest]: I understand that.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: Maybe, you know, your processes are…
[Guest]: Don't question the intent of people who are trying to do the right thing, right?
[Guest]: I mean, you're not saying that we are going to come and dictate what, you know, what you
[Guest]: want to do.
[Guest]: All we're saying is, this is an important thing, let's study it.
[Guest]: You know, the organization that gets the funds has a free hand to report what they need to
[Guest]: report.
[Guest]: It's a good thing.
[Guest]: Let's take that into consideration next time you make a budget.
[Guest]: Replicate this in Nagpur, replicate this in Pune, right?
[Amit Varma]: And if it's a bad thing, fix it.
[Guest]: Fix it.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: Why do we have such a huge reluctance in studying our systems, right, documenting with data?
[Guest]: Why is it so difficult to do this?
[Guest]: We don't want our NSSO to study economic data.
[Guest]: We don't want the health ministry to study health data.
[Guest]: How are we making policy then?
[Guest]: These are like, you know, simple things, right?
[Guest]: Look, Ayushman Bharat is a goldmine because, you know, the program has been running for
[Guest]: a few years right now.
[Guest]: We know how many people have been enrolled, right?
[Guest]: Why don't you open up the database to, you know, academic researchers and say, find out
[Guest]: what is the real benefit?
[Guest]: How many people have actually claimed the five lakh benefit?
[Guest]: Wouldn't you want to know, right?
[Guest]: Wouldn't you want to?
[Guest]: This government data, right?
[Guest]: Happens in the US, the Center for Medicaid Services, every quarter they do a data dump
[Guest]: and put it out there and say, go knock yourself out.
[Guest]: Why is this a state secret?
[Amit Varma]: So I'll throw back that question at you and change it from a rhetorical question to an
[Amit Varma]: actual one, and maybe offer possible contender answers, and I'm sure the answer is very complicated.
[Amit Varma]: But why is it a state secret?
[Amit Varma]: Why does the state have this attitude like, at one level, it is, of course, inertia at
[Amit Varma]: one level, it is this reflexive thing of protecting that turf, you know, why let outsiders in,
[Amit Varma]: why have to go through that shit, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: But yeah, but beyond it being a rhetorical question, what would you say structurally?
[Guest]: You need people who want to do this.
[Guest]: I mean, there's no other way, right?
[Guest]: I mean, I worked very closely with Keshav Desi Raju, who just passed away, he was on
[Guest]: the board of my foundation.
[Guest]: We need people like that, very progressive bureaucrat, who wanted to make a change on
[Guest]: the ground.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, to me, not a satisfactory answer, because whenever people say we need people,
[Amit Varma]: we need good people here, or we need good people in politics, or we need good people
[Amit Varma]: wherever, where I always go back to is that people will come if the incentives are there.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, to me, that's a core problem.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, even going back to the academic thing, if there are things that academics don't want
[Amit Varma]: to do, the question that I ask is, what are their incentives?
[Amit Varma]: Why don't they want to do this?
[Amit Varma]: And of course, one you've pointed out is that it's very hard to get government funding for
[Amit Varma]: these kinds of studies and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: That's legit.
[Amit Varma]: And equally, even if someone like you is to fund it from outside, it can take months or
[Amit Varma]: years or never for that to kind of get through.
[Amit Varma]: But I'm just trying to then solve that deeper.
[Amit Varma]: And this is, of course, a question that's working at many levels, what are the incentives
[Amit Varma]: of academics?
[Amit Varma]: What are the incentives of people in the government to stop this?
[Amit Varma]: We kind of know that the reflexive thing is status quo bias to protect your turf, all
[Guest]: of that.
[Guest]: No, no, you're right.
[Guest]: I think I'm not saying that people are the only solution.
[Guest]: I think that systems have to change as well, right?
[Guest]: Part of it is also making sure that the way that we think about health is cannot be only
[Guest]: when we need health care, right?
[Guest]: That's the way that we normally think.
[Guest]: We only think about hospitals and health is when we need it.
[Guest]: Normally we don't, right?
[Guest]: Tell me the last election where health care was an issue that was actually litigated between
[Guest]: state parties.
[Guest]: I can't remember one, right?
[Guest]: So the point here is that you need to first create awareness.
[Guest]: You need to first educate people.
[Guest]: I'll tell you a really interesting episode, I always use this as a really good example
[Guest]: when I talk to people.
[Guest]: Atul Gawande had written this piece in The New Yorker.
[Guest]: And it's an excellent piece, if you maybe should look it from your show notes.
[Guest]: He basically compared the progression of two different medical procedures.
[Guest]: One is anesthesia, the other is antiseptic, you know, sort of stuff.
[Guest]: So this takes you back to about early 1800s, you know, when there was no anesthesia.
[Guest]: I mean, even if you had to do tooth extraction, you really had to do it very quickly because
[Guest]: it's really painful, right?
[Guest]: So in those days, somebody at Mass General, you know, one of the dentists actually went
[Guest]: up to the surgeon and basically said, I found something that actually will numb pain down,
[Guest]: you know.
[Guest]: And obviously, ether was the one that was used to sort of, you know, you get people
[Guest]: to smell ether and then it knocks you out and you get the tooth extraction, you do your
[Guest]: surgery.
[Guest]: But that spread like a wildfire.
[Guest]: Within a few months, pretty much every hospital began using that as a procedure for essentially
[Guest]: making sure that, you know, patients don't suffer much, right?
[Guest]: And then he compares that with antiseptic behavior.
[Guest]: So, you know, there was a time when the scalpels and instruments were not sterilized, right?
[Guest]: And that was the cause of lupus and septic shock.
[Guest]: People went into septic shock.
[Guest]: And he talks about how, you know, Joseph Lister, using carbolic acid basically, you know, came
[Guest]: up with this concept that if you wash your, you know, instruments and your hands and everything
[Guest]: else with carbolic acid, you kill the germs essentially from causing.
[Guest]: But that never took off at the same pace as anesthesia did, right?
[Guest]: And he compares why, incentives of why, you know, the fact is one is very visible.
[Guest]: You have a patient who's like shouting really bad because they're under a lot of pain.
[Guest]: You don't see the germs, right?
[Guest]: Surgeons don't look at the germs, you know, they don't, you know, they don't think about
[Guest]: I mean, this is the times when, you know, aprons covered in blood was a mark of, you
[Guest]: know, that you were doing so many surgeries, right?
[Guest]: You were a good doctor, you did so many surgeries.
[Guest]: People don't think about the fact that, you know, you need to change your apron, you need
[Guest]: to change your gauzes, you need to wash your hands properly before you went into another
[Guest]: surgery.
[Guest]: Because, you know, if you appeared as somebody with blood on your, you know, your apron,
[Guest]: you were a really good doctor.
[Guest]: You had a really good practice and people came to you with that.
[Guest]: Incentives are very different.
[Guest]: So what he talks about is that, look, because anesthesia is so visible to people, right?
[Guest]: The patient is screaming in pain, the adoption is so much faster.
[Guest]: But it's not like antiseptic behavior was any less effective, it was equally important
[Guest]: because people were dying of septic shock, of the fact that, you know, people were getting
[Guest]: infected because, you know, you wouldn't have clean procedures and carbolic acid and Joseph
[Guest]: Lister's work actually proved that if you did that, you'd save a lot of patients.
[Guest]: But because it was not visible, it wasn't adopted as quickly as it did.
[Guest]: I come back to the same thing.
[Guest]: Healthcare is, it's not visible.
[Guest]: We don't think about healthcare.
[Guest]: We don't think about a doctor.
[Guest]: We don't think about going to a really healthy hospital unless something really bad happens
[Guest]: to us.
[Amit Varma]: This is such a fantastic and profound point and along with carbolic acid, there's also
[Amit Varma]: the resistance that Ignaz Semmelweis found where, you know, when he spoke about the importance
[Amit Varma]: of just washing hands, washing hands, and it took decades for that to get accepted.
[Amit Varma]: And if I remember correctly, Semmelweis died in a lunatic asylum.
[Amit Varma]: So just a sad state of some kind of pioneers and this whole thing of the seen and the unseen
[Amit Varma]: that where the effect of something is immediate, your incentives drive you to do it.
[Amit Varma]: And if it is unseen, and you know, you mentioned an anesthetic, I remember writing about agriculture
[Amit Varma]: once, the problems of agriculture and pointing out that sometimes, for example, farm loan
[Amit Varma]: waivers are a necessary anesthetic because the farmers are in so much pain, you have
[Amit Varma]: to kind of get it.
[Amit Varma]: But you're not tackling any of the root causes.
[Amit Varma]: And if you look at what's popular among politicians, tackling the root causes is not because a
[Amit Varma]: politician has his eyes on the next election.
[Amit Varma]: And if you solve the fundamental problems, you'll see benefits 15 years down the line
[Amit Varma]: and they'll never be attributed to you.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: Whereas farm loan waivers are immediate.
[Guest]: And it's almost like…
[Amit Varma]: You recognize that you got a farm loan waiver.
[Amit Varma]: And if one not intended, they become almost a hygiene factor now, every politician has
[Guest]: to…
[Guest]: No, but I mean, that's the thing, right?
[Guest]: I think we need to start this level of awareness among us, right?
[Guest]: Because at some point in time, right?
[Guest]: If not me today, 30 years from now, 20 years from now, I'm going to need help, you know,
[Guest]: medical help.
[Guest]: But if I wait until that time to try and affect the system, it's going to be too late, right?
[Guest]: We need to start now and it's not like, you know, whatever we do right now within a year
[Guest]: is going to burn through.
[Guest]: It's not going to happen.
[Guest]: This is a systemic, longer term problem that we have to think about.
[Guest]: And unless this becomes a part of mainstream political dialogue, I'm sorry, this is not
[Amit Varma]: going to change.
[Amit Varma]: Well, what I'm using, and I'm just thinking aloud again, is that at one level, we are
[Amit Varma]: wired to not think of mortality, to assume, to be delusional about our mortality almost.
[Amit Varma]: We all behave as if we will live forever, right?
[Amit Varma]: And is our taking health for granted sort of an extension of that, that we assume we
[Amit Varma]: will never be ill.
[Amit Varma]: We assume we will never see the inside of a hospital.
[Guest]: But reality is we all will at some point, right?
[Guest]: Reality is we all will.
[Guest]: We're just, you know, wired that way that we won't think about the morbid thought of
[Guest]: us needing, you know, hospitalization.
[Guest]: But the fact is that, you know, there has to be an academic community that does think
[Guest]: about this, right?
[Guest]: Because education and healthcare, if you're not going to make public investments in this,
[Guest]: then the society is going to degrade.
[Guest]: You know, if you don't educate your people and you don't provide proper healthcare, those
[Guest]: are the two basic things any administration ought to do.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about the kind of pushback you get from people who matter.
[Amit Varma]: For example, I would assume that say, for somebody like a Narendra Modi, who obviously
[Amit Varma]: cares about legacy and narrative and all of that, right?
[Amit Varma]: You know, for me, it would seem sitting here to be such a fantastic narrative that in 2013,
[Amit Varma]: you know, this was what they announced.
[Amit Varma]: And then I came and I've cleaned it all up.
[Amit Varma]: And I have made this actually the, you know, deservedly the pharmacy of the world and all
[Amit Varma]: of that.
[Amit Varma]: Why would he not do that?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, and you've met ministers trying to explain.
[Guest]: No, no.
[Guest]: So I, you know, here's the thing.
[Guest]: I mean, I've never met.
[Guest]: So I don't know.
[Guest]: I think part of this is when you are at that level, there are 50 things in front of you.
[Guest]: This is one of them, right?
[Guest]: That's number one.
[Guest]: Whether that registers against perhaps a farmer's protest, I don't know where the priorities
[Guest]: are, right?
[Guest]: This requires a longer term vision.
[Guest]: And I've never been able to find somebody in the administration who's willing to give
[Guest]: me an hour's worth of time.
[Guest]: We've been talking for several hours right now.
[Guest]: This is a luxury.
[Guest]: This is a luxury, right?
[Guest]: You get 10 minutes.
[Guest]: And in 10 minutes, if you're able to sort of convey the import of what you're trying
[Guest]: to do to somebody who's distracted, I mean, it happened with Harshvardhan, half the time
[Amit Varma]: I was looking at the television screen.
[Amit Varma]: No, you met Harshvardhan as you've described.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Guest]: I mean, he made me wait outside his office for two hours.
[Guest]: And then in the 10 minutes that I've been there, he was looking at the TV screen half
[Guest]: the time.
[Guest]: And he asked me to write and send me a report, which, you know, I did.
[Guest]: But the point here is that if that is the attitude you have, then you're not going to
[Guest]: be able to get anything out of it, right?
[Guest]: I think maybe the right approach is states are the laboratories of democracy.
[Guest]: Maybe there is a progressive leader in one of the states that believes in the kindness
[Guest]: that we're talking about, implements it, shows that the model that, look, we've really made
[Guest]: a difference.
[Guest]: Because one good thing about health care is that you can measure outcomes very easily.
[Guest]: You can measure infant mortality.
[Guest]: You can measure maternal health.
[Guest]: You can measure non-communicable diseases.
[Guest]: You can measure the number of infections, hospitalization.
[Guest]: This is very, you know, computational-driven, you know, problem, unlike several other things
[Guest]: which are difficult to measure.
[Guest]: But it requires you to put some effort into it, right?
[Guest]: You really have to.
[Guest]: And this doesn't pay back in eight months.
[Guest]: It requires a two-year, three-year window where you really – I mean, I would love
[Guest]: to see a state basically saying that in every district or village that we have, we have
[Guest]: a properly staffed public health center.
[Guest]: And I'm not talking about the one that exists on paper, properly staffed, right, with a
[Guest]: paramedic or a nurse, where the doctor comes in once a week to be able to – that would
[Guest]: be such a huge accomplishment if you're able to do that.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I'd love to, at some point, get you together with Karthik Muralidharan and do
[Amit Varma]: a joint episode.
[Amit Varma]: We've already discussed how our mutual friend Ajay Shah, we'll invite him once and the three
[Amit Varma]: of us can have a conversation.
[Amit Varma]: And that's going to be so insightful.
[Amit Varma]: By the way, the reason I'm giving you so much time and ministers don't give you ten minutes
[Amit Varma]: – it's all about how important the person is.
[Amit Varma]: You can gauge the importance of people by how much time they give you.
[Guest]: Ministers are very important people, podcasters sadly are not so high on the scale of things.
[Guest]: But I think, you know, your reach, I think, is far greater than what any minister can
[Guest]: say.
[Guest]: I mean, the people who listen to your podcast are a select few who really understand the
[Guest]: importance of, you know, the conversation that is happening.
[Guest]: And the diversity of topics that you entertain, the guests that you have, and the depth into
[Guest]: which you explore these things.
[Guest]: I mean, that's, you know, it's not something that anybody, you know, not everybody can
[Amit Varma]: pull this thing off.
[Amit Varma]: This is really, really important.
[Amit Varma]: No, thank you.
[Amit Varma]: That's very kind of you.
[Guest]: But I wasn't wishing for a compliment.
[Guest]: No, no, of course.
[Guest]: This is reality.
[Guest]: Because I am one of those.
[Guest]: I'm one of those.
[Guest]: Because I do listen to a lot of, you know, what your episodes are and I thoroughly enjoy
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: I think that, you know, this is, I always look forward to, because for me it's Monday
[Guest]: morning there, by the time that your podcast drops, so.
[Amit Varma]: It's probably Tuesday morning because I shifted release from Sunday to Monday.
[Guest]: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
[Amit Varma]: It's Tuesday morning.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me something.
[Amit Varma]: I've taken enough of your time and now I have to seem important in somehow bringing this
[Amit Varma]: to a close.
[Amit Varma]: But no, I've taken a lot of your time and you've also been kind with so much of your
[Amit Varma]: time.
[Amit Varma]: Going forward, when you sort of map out what you want to do, like I presume at one point
[Amit Varma]: when you were younger, you were driven by whatever was imperative at that point in time.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe you come to Renbeck C and it's like, oh, we'll do these innovative things in this
[Amit Varma]: new market and build a market leader and whatever.
[Amit Varma]: But obviously the direction that your life took, partly due to circumstances outside
[Amit Varma]: your control, have taken you into a very different place.
[Amit Varma]: So one is there sometimes a sense that something is lost there, that a career that you could
[Amit Varma]: have had and a body of work that you could have built has just gone with the years.
[Amit Varma]: And two, and I frankly think what you're doing is incredibly more important than anything
[Amit Varma]: else could have, any counterfactual could have been.
[Amit Varma]: But going forward, over the next 10, 15 years, how have you planned out, you know, how have
[Amit Varma]: you looked at what you want to do in those years to come?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So I think the first question, it's an easy question.
[Guest]: I honestly am not enamored of a career.
[Guest]: You know, so for better or for worse, I think that I've always had the satisfaction, you
[Guest]: know, in my limited corporate career, that I think that I've achieved a few things.
[Guest]: I mean, they may not be all that great, but, you know, I'm quite happy with that part of
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: And I don't miss, I mean, the one thing that I certainly don't miss is managing people.
[Guest]: I just, being very honest with you, I don't have the patience.
[Guest]: I did once, I mean, when I left Phyphormix, there were 600 people.
[Guest]: I don't miss managing people.
[Guest]: I think it requires a certain aptitude and test that I just don't have anymore.
[Guest]: So I'm very happy with, you know, just being an individual contributor at this point in
[Guest]: time.
[Guest]: The second question, I think, is a more important question.
[Guest]: I think that, you know, when I look in another 10 years down the road, if I think India has
[Guest]: a drug regulatory system that is on par with what the European Union has and the US FDA,
[Guest]: US does, I'd be the most happiest person, you know, in terms of the competence of the
[Guest]: people that we have, in terms of the processes that we execute, and in terms of the responsiveness
[Guest]: to the people of the country, right?
[Guest]: If we get to that point in the next 10 years, no one would be more happier than I.
[Amit Varma]: And how possible do you think that is?
[Guest]: That is not in my control, right?
[Amit Varma]: That is not...
[Amit Varma]: But if you had to, like, think of probabilities...
[Guest]: I think that there is a more than 50% probability that it will happen, and I'll tell you why.
[Guest]: One of the things that, you know, both Prashant and I and other people who are with my foundation
[Guest]: are doing is making substantial investments in creating awareness.
[Guest]: And we're hoping that over a period of time, that percolates down in the society, in the
[Guest]: system.
[Guest]: So just a simple thing that we're doing is that, you know, we have a project where we
[Guest]: have now...
[Guest]: We've come halfway, the other half is beginning, starting right now, where we've commissioned
[Guest]: a bunch of people to write down the history of how we evolved, how our public health system
[Guest]: has evolved.
[Guest]: It's an 18-episode series, one hour each.
[Guest]: And, you know, so the script is done, the research is done, and now we are in the process
[Guest]: of working with a media partner to commission the production of that.
[Guest]: And the goal is to try and dump it down to a point where a common person should understand
[Guest]: that, you know, if there is a pandemic that comes next time, right?
[Guest]: That there are systems and institutions in this country whose job is it to respond.
[Guest]: And if they're not included in that response, we have to ask why.
[Guest]: Like I'll give you a very simple example this time.
[Guest]: Why is it that when the pandemic broke, we had people from ICMR speaking to the country?
[Guest]: ICMR is a research institution.
[Guest]: We have an institution called NCDC, right?
[Guest]: National Center for Disease Control.
[Guest]: That is the one that actually does the work in terms of pandemic response.
[Guest]: That is the one that does surveillance, right?
[Guest]: Why is it that the NCDC did not play a larger role in developing a pandemic response?
[Guest]: Why is it that we have celebrity doctors, one of whom is a pediatrician, not a virologist,
[Guest]: not an epidemiologist, the other one is a cardiovascular surgeon?
[Guest]: What do you know about epidemiology?
[Guest]: What do you know about pandemic response?
[Guest]: What do you know about public health?
[Guest]: Why do you undercut institutions that you've set up on your own, right?
[Guest]: Next time if we ever happen to be in a situation like this, the layperson should have this
[Guest]: understanding to say, you know what, my taxpayer money is going into funding NCDC in the country,
[Guest]: whose job is to look for outbreaks, whose job is to develop a pandemic response, whose
[Guest]: job is to figure out how do we inoculate and vaccinate people.
[Guest]: Yes, the ICMR people and the AIMS people can certainly be contributors to this, but we
[Guest]: need people qualified from a pandemic response point of view, right?
[Guest]: Why did we choose a vaccine candidate that requires BL-3 or BL-4 facilities, the highest
[Guest]: class, because we are using inactivated virus to make a vaccine, right?
[Guest]: Most of the world was using virus-derived vector-borne, if you look at COVID shield or mRNA vaccines.
[Guest]: We chose the most complex process to make our vaccine, and then we wonder why it wasn't
[Guest]: scaling up.
[Guest]: Who made that decision, right?
[Guest]: And if you don't include people from NCDC who are qualified to be able to look at this,
[Guest]: then can we really find fault with them?
[Guest]: Why is it that there is no medical malpractice law in the country?
[Guest]: Why doesn't it really happen, right?
[Guest]: I'm not advocating for it, but the fact is that how many times have you really heard
[Guest]: somebody who's been wronged actually litigated in a court?
[Guest]: I mean, you say go to consumer courts, yeah, you go to consumer courts, get a resolution
[Guest]: in two years, I'll tell you, right?
[Guest]: There are some systemic issues we have, and I really think that we need to have a conversation
[Guest]: about this.
[Guest]: I don't have a solution.
[Guest]: I don't think that anybody that I know has a solution.
[Guest]: But I think it's important to have a conversation, talk about it, right?
[Guest]: So that people understand that, you know what, there is a solution to this.
[Guest]: It's just that we're not doing it, but there is a solution to this.
[Guest]: And if I'm so inclined to lend my voice, perhaps something will happen.
[Amit Varma]: This series sounds fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I can see you fighting an information war on two fronts, right?
[Amit Varma]: At one level, you build up that awareness of what the system is like in the mind of
[Amit Varma]: the citizen, the taxpayer, so that they know what, and everybody's a taxpayer, so that
[Amit Varma]: they know, so that background of information and that context is there.
[Amit Varma]: And at the same time, you're working on building data about things that happen now, things
[Amit Varma]: that happen around us all the time.
[Amit Varma]: So we can respond with the adequate outrage to things that should drive us to outrage.
[Amit Varma]: If someone listening to this is asking a question, what can I do?
[Amit Varma]: And this is a question at two levels, like at one level is like yesterday during dinner,
[Amit Varma]: I asked you that as an individual consumer, when I go out to buy medicine, what can I
[Amit Varma]: do?
[Amit Varma]: Is there something I should avoid?
[Amit Varma]: Is there something I should look for?
[Amit Varma]: And so on.
[Amit Varma]: That's one level.
[Amit Varma]: And the second level is, what can I do for the larger cause?
[Amit Varma]: Like what one of the laments that you've just sort of mentioned is that there are not enough
[Amit Varma]: people who are active in fighting for this cause.
[Amit Varma]: And in that sense, I guess, you know, it's been a lonely battle for you.
[Guest]: No, I think, you know, there are people, but they're not enough of us, right?
[Guest]: Anything requires a critical mass awareness, I mean, like what you're doing right now,
[Guest]: this is your contribution, right?
[Guest]: You are essentially informing your audience about an issue where, you know, this perhaps
[Guest]: wouldn't have registered on people's radar, right?
[Guest]: This is a huge public service, right?
[Guest]: Likewise, I think the people who are listening, take a moment to read up, right?
[Guest]: Take a moment to just inform yourself above and beyond the normal television debates that
[Guest]: we see about how public health works in our country, right?
[Guest]: What institutions are there?
[Guest]: How does states, you know, sort of regulate healthcare versus the center does, right?
[Guest]: How does our regulatory system respond to issues of, you know, what we actually, you
[Guest]: know, face, like, you know, emergency-related issues, like pandemics come our way.
[Guest]: We still have endemic tropical diseases, right?
[Guest]: No pharma company is going to develop a cure for sickle cell anemia because there's not
[Guest]: enough of a market for them.
[Guest]: They are not going to develop, you know, novel therapeutics for cholera, for example, or
[Guest]: typhoid, or for malaria.
[Guest]: I mean, malaria, at least there's some vaccination work happening in that we have a vaccine candidate
[Guest]: for malaria.
[Guest]: What I'm saying is that, you know, there are things that are endemic to us, right?
[Guest]: Pharma companies will only do it if they see dollars, big tons of money behind it, right?
[Guest]: Those big pharma companies are not going to develop solutions for us.
[Guest]: Inform ourselves, right?
[Guest]: Ask these questions, right?
[Guest]: I mean, it's great that, you know, our pharma companies are earning a lot of money by manufacturing
[Guest]: all of this stuff for the Western markets.
[Guest]: Why can't, you know, you hold them to the same standard when you make drugs for the
[Guest]: local market here, right?
[Guest]: The argument that I always get is, oh, it's, you know, price points in India are very,
[Guest]: very, very tight here because you can't make the same amount of bullshit.
[Guest]: I've actually shown that the price points are actually very similar in India compared
[Guest]: to what, you know, they get paid by the government-negotiated insurance companies over there.
[Guest]: Very similar price points here.
[Guest]: See, what happens is that if we don't know enough, right, we accept a lot of what somebody
[Guest]: says.
[Guest]: Don't take what I'm saying, you know, as gospel read up.
[Guest]: There's tons of information available out there.
[Guest]: You don't, I don't need medicine right now, but my parents do.
[Guest]: How much medicine can I buy from them from the US and bring to India every time I come
[Guest]: here?
[Guest]: I can't do that, right?
[Guest]: I have to make sure that our medicine gets better here.
[Amit Varma]: You know, the more kind of frivolous of those questions at an individual level, you know,
[Amit Varma]: what can we do?
[Amit Varma]: Like, when I go to a pharmacy for whatever, what do I need to watch out for?
[Amit Varma]: Are there companies I need to avoid?
[Guest]: No, I mean, by and large, I think that the larger companies usually, you know, they should
[Guest]: make good drugs, right, because the reputational damage for them from bad kind of stuff is
[Guest]: really bad.
[Guest]: They don't want, you know, something get reported that the drug that they made actually caused
[Guest]: harm to people.
[Guest]: By and large, that's true.
[Guest]: The issue is more, I think, what we need to do is to put some pressure on the, our administration
[Guest]: to say that provide us a mechanism to report when things don't go right, right?
[Guest]: When, you know, like, you know, when you've taken a vaccine and you see adverse events,
[Guest]: you know, a couple of days later, you see, you know, a sore arm or you develop a rash,
[Guest]: they encourage you to report that right now, right?
[Guest]: Why don't we do the same thing for medicine?
[Guest]: We should do that, right?
[Guest]: I mean, the government has set up a National Pharmacovigilance Center in order to collect
[Guest]: this data.
[Guest]: But we don't talk about it.
[Guest]: We don't.
[Guest]: There's no public service announcement saying, okay, if your medicine doesn't work.
[Guest]: I mean, nine or ten times what happens if the medicine doesn't do what it's supposed
[Guest]: to do, you go back to the doctor and doctor says, we'll change your prescription.
[Guest]: We'll find, give you another different, you know, different medicine or the one from a
[Guest]: different manufacturer.
[Guest]: That's the end of it.
[Guest]: Well, if you don't report, then I can't really complain about data, can I?
[Amit Varma]: No.
[Amit Varma]: And if all this data in a frictionless way was just being collected, then over time,
[Amit Varma]: you'd just be able to, you know, figure out problems before they sort of take lives.
[Guest]: So I mean, these are things that we can do at our own individual level, which we have
[Guest]: to.
[Guest]: Otherwise, this is not going to change, right?
[Guest]: There are significant vested interests that create inertia in any kind of progress that
[Guest]: you want to make in this space, and unfortunately, it's a reality.
[Amit Varma]: Well, Dinesh, thanks so much for coming on the show, sharing your time and insights.
[Amit Varma]: It's been, you know, I'm going to sort of listen to this episode again and kind of process
[Amit Varma]: a lot of what you said, because I just think it's incredibly important.
[Guest]: So thank you.
[Guest]: Thank you very much.
[Guest]: This has been, you know, an absolute pleasure.
[Guest]: And I have to tell you that I've been the beneficiary of a lot of your conversations,
[Guest]: you know, when I go for a run or a walk, you know, you know, where I am, a lot of times
[Guest]: I've learned so much from, you know, all the guests that you invite, the conversations
[Guest]: that you have, and it's been an incredible honor to be here.
[Amit Varma]: If you like this episode, do check out the links in the show notes for more, and also
[Amit Varma]: pick up Bottle of Lies by Catherine Eban.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow Dinesh on Twitter at D underscore S underscore Thakur.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Seen and The Unseen at seenunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: But just one thing, now that this episode is over, please don't forget what we discussed
[Amit Varma]: during this episode.
[Amit Varma]: This is a big deal, it affects all of us.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.